
UNIVERSITY OF SINDH      
JAMSHORO, SINDH—PAKISTAN

	
	FACULTY OF EDUCATION, HYDERABAD.
B. Ed (Elementary 4 Year)
Course.EFID-501 			                         Semester-V				Credit Hours	03
Title of the Course			Human  Growth&amp;Development
Course Description
This course explores the principles and processes of human growth and development across the lifespan—from conception to late adulthood. Emphasis is placed on physical, cognitive, emotional, social, and moral development, as well as the interaction of biological, psychological, and socio-cultural factors. Students will examine major theories of human development and apply them to real-life contexts such as health, education, family, and society.
Learning Outcomes
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
Explain key concepts, principles, and theories of human growth and development.
Describe developmental changes across the lifespan in physical, cognitive, emotional, and social domains.
Analyze the influence of biological, psychological, and socio-cultural factors on human development.
Apply developmental theories to real-world situations in health, education, and social contexts.
Demonstrate an understanding of individual differences and diversity in development.
Evaluate developmental challenges and transitions at different life stages.
Course Outline

Week 1: Introduction to Human Development
Growth vs development 
Principles of development 
Nature vs nurture debate 
Week 2: Theories of Human Development (Part 1)
Psychoanalytic theory – Sigmund Freud 
Psychosocial theory – Erik Erikson 
Week 3: Theories of Human Development (Part 2)
Cognitive development – Jean Piaget 
Sociocultural theory – Lev Vygotsky
Week 4: Research Methods in Development
Methods: observation, survey, case study 
Longitudinal vs cross-sectional research 
Ethical considerations 
Week 5: Prenatal Development
Stages: germinal, embryonic, fetal 
Influences on prenatal development 
Maternal health 
Week 6: Infancy (0–2 Years)
Physical and motor development 
Sensory abilities 
Attachment theory 
Week 7: Early Childhood (2–6 Years)
Language development 
Cognitive growth 
Social and emotional development 
Week 8: Mid-Term Review / Exam
Revision of Weeks 1–7 
Mid-term assessment 
Week 9: Middle Childhood (6–12 Years)
School readiness 
Peer relationships 
Moral development 
Week 10: Adolescence
Physical changes (puberty) 
Identity development 
Emotional challenges 
Week 11: Early Adulthood
Career and relationships 
Lifestyle choices 
Cognitive maturity 
Week 12: Middle Adulthood
Physical and psychological changes 
Family and work responsibilities 
Life transitions 

Week 13: Late Adulthood
Aging process 
Retirement and adjustment 
Health issues 
Week 14: Individual Differences
Intelligence and personality 
Gender differences 
Cultural influences 
Week 15: Contemporary Issues in Development
Technology and development 
Mental health awareness 
Inclusive education 
Week 16: Final Review &amp; Exam
Course revision 
Final examination / project
Teaching/ Instruction Strategies 

Lectures
Interactive Discussions
Question-Answer Session
Demonstration
Case Study Analysis  
Practical Work
Hands-on Computer Exercises
Individual Assignments
Group Assignments
Internet-Research tasks
Presentations 

Recommended Books

https://skyfox.co/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/HUMAN-GROWTH-AND-DEVELOPMENT.pdf
https://ndl.ethernet.edu.et/bitstream/123456789/91888/1/Human%20Growth%20and%20Development_%20An%20Introduction%20for%20Social%20Workers%20%28Student%20Social%20Work%29	%20%28%20PDFDrive%20%29.pdf
https://oer.galileo.usg.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?params=/context/psychology-collections/article/1001/&amp;path_info=Human_Growth_and_Development.pdf

504825-279405438140-186055-495935-1574808669655-260985

B. Ed. 4  Years
Course No. EFID-502

Credit Hours
3

Title of Course 
Media Education
Semester : 5th

Course Description 
This course introduces student-teachers to the concepts, scope, and significance of media education in contemporary society. It focuses on developing critical media literacy, understanding the role of print, electronic, and digital media in education, and integrating media effectively into teaching and learning processes. The course also addresses ethical, social, and cultural issues related to media use, with particular reference to the Pakistani context.
Learning Outcomes:
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
Explain the concept, nature, and importance of media education.
Analyze the role of media in education and society.
Develop critical media literacy skills.
Integrate media and technology effectively in classroom teaching.
Identify ethical, social, and cultural issues related to media use.
Course Outline
Unit 1: Introduction to Media Education
Concept, meaning, and scope of media education
Types of media: print, electronic, and digital
Media education and media literacy
Role of media in modern education
Unit 2: Media and Society
Media as an agent of socialization
Influence of media on culture, values, and attitudes
Media, democracy, and public opinion
Media effects on children and youth
Unit 3: Media Literacy and Critical Thinking
Concept and components of media literacy
Critical analysis of media messages
Representation, bias, and stereotypes in media
Developing critical thinking through media education
Unit 4: Media in Teaching and Learning
Instructional use of print and electronic media
Educational television, radio, and newspapers
Digital media and social networking tools in education
Designing media-supported lessons
Unit 5: Educational Technology and Media Production
Basic concepts of educational technology
Media production tools and techniques
Developing simple instructional media materials
Role of teachers in media production
Unit 6: Ethical, Legal, and Cultural Issues
Media landscape in Pakistan
Role of media in Pakistani education system
Challenges of media education in Pakistan
Opportunities for promoting media literacy
Unit 7:Contemporary Trends and Challenges
Digital citizenship and online safety
Media education in the digital age
Challenges of misinformation and fake news
Future directions of media education
Recommended Books / References:
Buckingham, D. (2015). Media Education: Literacy, Learning and Contemporary Culture.
Potter, W. J. (2019). Media Literacy.
Masterman, L. (2013). Teaching the Media.
UNESCO (2011). Media and Information Literacy Curriculum for Teachers.
HEC Pakistan. Curriculum guidelines for teacher education.
TEACHING/INSTRUCTIONAL STRATEGIES
This course will be covered with the help of following teaching strategies
                 1. Lecture                                  2. Discussions
                 3. Question-Answer                  4. Brain storming

 PRACTICAL WORK
The student-teachers will also complete their course with the help of following practical work.
                 1. Group work                              2. Group assignments  
                 3. Individual assignment              4. Presentations

ASSESSMENT CRITERIA
The students will be assessed through,
1. Class test                              			2. Mid Term test                                                                            
3. Evaluation of assignments     				4.Class attendance               
            5. Class participation/Performance e.g. initiative, responding, curiosity, inquiry

5238044-297180left10795        UNIVERSITY OF SINDH
                          JAMSHORO SINDH, PAKISTAN

FACULTY OF EDUCATION, 
ELSA KAZI CAMPUS OLD CAMPUS HYDERABAD

 B.ED 4 years

	Course Code No.EFMP – 510Credit Hour :3
	
Course Title: School Management                       Semester : 5th
Course Objectives 
Explain the roles and responsibilities of effective school managers.
Apply management principles to school planning and organization.
Analyze leadership approaches for school improvement.
Evaluate school policies, resource allocation, and stakeholder engagement strategies.
Propose solutions for realworld school management challenges.
Weekly Teaching &amp; Learning Plan

Topics / Activities

Week 1 Introduction to School Management
Definitions, scope, purpose
Importance of school management systems. 

Week 2 Educational Organization &amp; Administration
Overview of school systems 
 Institutional frameworks School organization and management

Week 3 Planning and school Planning
Planning &amp; types of planning 
Strategic &amp; operational planning in schools. 

Week 04 Management Functions
Organizing – Roles, responsibilities, and organizational structures. 

Leading &amp; Supervising, Leadership styles, instructional leadership, and supervision. 

Controlling &amp; Evaluation – Monitoring, evaluation and quality assurance in schools. 

Week 05 Human Resource Management in School

Teacher recruitment, development and performance management. 

Financial &amp; Material Resource Management
Budgeting, finances, assets and resource allocation.

Week 06 Role of the Head Teacher / School Leader
School planning and goal setting
Time-table, staffing, and resource management
Financial management and budgeting at school level
Record keeping and documentation
Ensuring school discipline and safety

Week 07 School Culture and Climate
Role of head teacher in shaping school culture
Instructional leadership and positive school climate
Transformational leadership and school culture
Distributed leadership and collaborative culture
Leadership strategies for improving school climate

Week 08 Communication and Stakeholder Relations
  Identifying key stakeholders in school education
  Role of parents as educational stakeholders
  Teacher engagement and collaborative communication
  Student voice and participatory communication
  Community stakeholders and local partnerships

Week 09 School Policy, Governance &amp; Legal Frameworks
Education policies, governance systems and compliance
Education laws and regulations governing schools
 Constitutional provisions related to education (Article 25-A, Pakistan)
Legal rights and responsibilities of students
Legal obligations of teachers and school leaders
 Child protection and safeguarding laws in schools

Week 10 Health, Safety &amp; Student Welfare
  Counseling and guidance services in schools
  Support for students with special needs
  Welfare services for marginalized and vulnerable students
  Student discipline and well-being
  Attendance, dropout prevention, and retention strategies 
Policies and practices for student wellbeing and safety.

Week 11 Cocurricular Activities &amp; School Improvement

  Contribution of co-curricular activities to school effectiveness
  Co-curricular programs and academic achievement
  School culture and co-curricular engagement
  Co-curricular activities as a tool for student retention
  Enhancing school reputation through co-curricular excellence

Week 12 Case Studies &amp; ProblemSolving
  Case study on improving low student achievement
  Managing teacher resistance to change: a school case
  Case study on instructional leadership and classroom improvement
  School leadership during crisis and emergency situations
  Decision making under pressure: role of the head teacher
Week 13 Leadership for School Improvement
School improvement planning and change management
Data-driven decision making in schools
Quality assurance and accountability
Building a positive school culture
Managing conflict and problem solving

Week 14 Policy, Legal &amp; Accountability Role
Implementing education policies at school level
Ensuring compliance with education laws and regulations
Accountability of head teachers for school performance
Managing inspections, audits, and reporting
Handling student and teacher rights issue

Week 15 Contemporary &amp; Emerging Roles
Leading digital transformation in schools
Crisis management and leadership during emergencies
School leadership in post-COVID education
Environmental and sustainability leadership in schools
Preparing schools for future challenges
Week 16 Academic &amp; Instructional Leadership
Curriculum implementation and supervision
Improving teaching quality and classroom practices
Teacher professional development and mentoring
Monitoring student learning and academic performance
Promoting innovation and effective pedagogy

Learning Resources and Reference Books
Bush, T. – Theories of Educational Leadership and Management
Educational Management Administration and Leadership – various authors 
Hoy, W. K. &amp;Miskel, C. G. – Educational Administration: Theory, Research, and Practice
School Leadership That Works – by Robert J. Marzano
The Principalship – by Frederick C. Lunenburg 
Coursera – Courses on educational leadership and management 
edX – University-level courses on school administration 
FutureLearn – Leadership and teaching management programs 
Higher Education Commission Pakistan – Curriculum guidelines and research materials 
UNESCO – Reports on school leadership and policy 
World Bank – Educational management case studies 
Educational Management Administration &amp; Leadership 
Journal of Educational Administration 
International Journal of Educational Management 
YouTube – Channels on school leadership and classroom management 
Webinars by British Council on school improvement 
School internship programs 
Case studies of successful school leaders 
Workshops and seminars on educational leadership 
Peer collaboration and mentoring 
Google Classroom – For managing classes 
Microsoft Teams – For communication and coordination 
Schoology – School management system 
National Education Policy (Pakistan) 
School improvement plans 
Leadership competency frameworks

-248920-478014
654685-621030                FACULTY OF EDUCATION4956810-806449

	B.Ed. (04 Years)
Course No. EFMP-511
Curriculum Development 
(Major Professional-VI)
Credit Hours
3

Title of Course 

Semester
5th

Course Description 

This course is designed for the student-teacher of class B. Ed. (2.5 Year). The main areas of the course are Curriculum Development, design and issues and Trends in curriculum. This course describes the relation among curriculum development and design and monitoring and assessment. It also highlights the process of curriculum development. It describes the importance, scope, elements, foundations and models of curriculum. After completing this course student-teachers will be able to implement curriculum in real classroom situation by using different instructional strategies. 

Course Outcomes
At the end of this course, student Teachers will be able to do the following: 
Understand the concept of curriculum
discriminate between different types of curricula gain awareness of curriculum design and development
analyze the components of the curriculum development process 
state the critical issues, problems and trends in curriculum thinking
recognize the role of the teacher as a curriculum planner and developer to meet the challenges and demands of the 21st century
apply the skills and knowledge to translate intended curriculum into practice

Course Outline

UNIT 1: Introduction to curriculum 
	1.1 What is curriculum? 
	1.2 Various kinds of curriculum
	1.3 Essential elements in curriculum: Objectives, content selection, methodology and evaluation
	1.4 Curriculum Implementation
	1.5 Taxonomy of educational objectives (Blooms Taxonomy)
	
UNIT 2: Curriculum Design 
	
	2.1 The concept, need and importance of curriculum design
	2.2 Using the curriculum design process 
	2.3 The need for importance of teacher involvement in curriculum design
	
UNIT 3: Curriculum change and curriculum development in Pakistan 
3.1 Curriculum change and its sources
3.2 The process and strategies of curriculum change
3.3 Issues of curriculum change in Pakistan
3.4 The framework of curriculum development and implementation in sindh
3.5 Sindh school education standards and curriculum act 2014, Sindh act no. ix of 2015
3.6 Future trends in curriculum design
	

UNIT 4: Persuading an audience 
	4.1 Curriculum monitoring, evaluation and assessment
	4.2 Forms of curriculum evaluation (formative and summative)
	4.3 The role of evaluation in curriculum improvement
	4.4 Types of assessment (norm-referenced and criterion-referenced assessment, portfolio       assessment, and performance based assessment)
	4.5 Practical application of an assessment plan for the unit they have chosen to analyze (developed in another course in the program) through critique and development
	

UNIT 5: Foundations of Curriculum 
5.1 Philosophical Foundations
5.2 Psychological Foundations
5.3 Socio-Cultural Foundations

UNIT 6: Model of Curriculum
	6.1 Tyler Model
	6.2 Hilde Taba Model
	6.3 Wheeler Model

Textbooks and references

Rao, V.K. (2005), Principles of Curriculum, New Delhi: APH Publishing Co. 
Mridula, P. (2007), Principles of Curriculum reforms , New Delhi: Vedams eBooks Ltd. 
Veer, U (2004), Modern teacher training. New Delhi: Anmol Publications Ltd. 
Mansoor, N. (2000), Guidelines to teaching, Lahore: Pakistan Education Foundation 
Beane I. A., Toefer  C. F., &amp;Alessi S. J. (1986), Curriculum Planning and development
Boston: Allyn&amp; Bacon. Farooq R. A. (1993), Education System in Pakistan: Issues and Problems, Islamabad: Asia Society for the Promotion of Innovation and reforms in Education
Kelly A., (1999), The Curriculum: Theory and practice. London : Paul Chapman
McNeil J. D. (1990), Curriculum: A Comprehensive introduction, Los Angeles: Harper Collins 
Sharma R. C. (2002), Modern methods of curriculum organization . Jaipur: Book Enclave

Websites
Leslie Owen Wilson's  'Curriculum Index' offers an overview of curriculum development and planning 
http://www4.uwsp. edu/education/lwilson/curric/curtyp. htm
http://www.sindheducation.govt.pk

TEACHING/INSTRUCTIONAL STRATEGIES
This course will be covered with the help of following teaching strategies
                 1. Lecture                                  2. Discussions
                 3. Question-Answer                  4. Brain storming
 PRACTICAL WORK
The student-teachers will also complete their course with the help of following practical work.
                 1. Group work                              2. Group assignments  
                 3. Individual assignment              4. Presentations

ASSESSMENT CRITERIA
The students will be assessed through,
1. Class test                              			2. Mid Term test                                                                            
3. Evaluation of assignments        				4.Class attendance               
            5. Class participation/Performance e.g. initiative, responding, curiosity, inquiry

-1491760UNIVERSITY OF SINDH 
JAMSHORO SINDH, PAKISTA

FACULTY OF EDUCATION, ELSA QAZI CAMPUS, HYDERABAD.

Title of Course:			Teaching of Urdu					
Course No.:	EFPG-503					                       Credit Hours: 3 (3-0)	
Major: Pedagogy Course	Semester:5th  Part-III			B.Ed. (4 year)

کورس کا تعارف :

اس کورس میں زیر تربیت اساتذہ نظریہ، آموزش زبان (The Theory of Learning of Language) اور زبان کے متنوع ماحول
 (Feature of a language Rich Environment) کے حوالے سے تدریس زبان کو سمجھیں گے ۔ ماہرین زبان کا کہنا ہے کہ زبان کا فطری نظام پیدائش سے قبل ہی ہمارے دماغ میں موجود ہوتا ہے اور یہ پرو گرام یونیورسل گرائمر کہلاتا ہے۔ بچے اپنی معصوم عمر ہی میں ہم سے اچھے زبان کے متعلم ہوتے ہیں۔ اس نظریے کے تحت اس کورس میں ابتدائی اور وسطانی جماعتوں کی درجہ بندی کی گئی ہے۔ لسانی مہارتوں کو جماعت بندی کے تحت عملی تدریسی طریقے (سننا، بولنا اور سمجھنا) اور عملی تدریسی طریقے (پڑھنا اور لکھنا) میں تقسیم کیا گیا ہے۔ علاوہ ازیں ان مہارتوں پر دسترس کے نقطہء نظر سے سمعی و صوتی (آڈیو لنگوئل) اور مکمل طبعی (ٹوٹل فزیکل ) جیسے عملی طریقوں سے استفادہ کیا گیا ہے۔

جائزہ و پیمائش اور اس پر تنقید کرنا مدرس کے لیے بہت مفید ہے۔ اشارات سبق کامیاب تدریسی حکمت عملی کی ضمانت ہیں۔ جو اساتذہ کی تربیت کا لازمی حصہ ہیں۔ اس لیے اس نصاب میں ایلیمنٹری اساتذہ جماعت اول تا هشتم جدید سبقی اشارات نہ صرف خود تیار کریں گے بلکہ ایلیمنٹری مدارس میں ان کی عملی مشق کریں گے۔ اس کورس کی جدت یہ ہے کہ سبقی اشارات کی تیاری اور عملی مشق کورس کا آخری یونٹ نہیں بلکہ دوران کورس جاری رہے گیاور اس کے ساتھ ساتھ ابتدائی جماعتوں میں پڑھنا پڑھانے کی تدریسی حکمت عملیاں اور جانچنے کے طریقہ کار کو کورس کا حصہ بنایا گیا ہے۔
حاصلاتکورسCourse Outcomes 
اس کورس کی تکمیل کے بعد زیر تربیت اساتذہ اس قابل ہو جائیں گے کہ وہ: 
The Theory of Learning of Language))نظریہء آموزش زبان کے فطری تقاضوں کو سمجھ سکیں۔
اردو زبان شناسی پر عبور حاصل کر سکیں۔
بنیادی لسانی مہارتوں ( سننا، بولنا، پڑھنا اور لکھنا) کی تدریس اور جائزے کی مختلف حکمت عملیوں کا استعمال کر سکیں۔
ابتدائی جماعتوں میں پڑھنا پڑھانے اور جائزے کے طریقہ کار استعمال کر سکیں۔
جائزہ و آزمائش کے جدید ترین طریقے سبقی اشارات میں استعمال کر سکیں۔
اُردو پڑھانے کے مختلف طریقہ ہائے تدریس میں عملی حکمت عملیوں کا مظاہرہ کر سکیں۔
ابتدائی سے وسطانی سطح کے تدریسی کو رس پر سمعی بصری معاونات و سبقی اشارات تیار کر سکیں۔

کورسائوٽ لائين
	یونٹ – ا :نظریہ زبان (Theory of Language)
	نظریہ زبان
	آموزش زبان کے وسیلے ( پیدائش سے پہلے اور بعد کے محرکات ، والدین، اساتذہ)
	 اُردو زبان کا متنوع ماحول
	 اردو کی بنیادی لسانی خصوصیات (صوتی،قواعدی، متنی)	
یونٹ - ۲: بنیادی لسانی مہارتیں ، تدریسی حکمت عملیاں اور جائزے کے طریقے
Basic Linguistic Skills, Instructional methodologies and methods of assessment
بنیادی لسانی مہارتوں کا تعارف (سننا، بولنا، پڑھنا، لکھنا)
 سننے کی مہارت کی تدریسی حکمت عملیاں ( فطری طریقہ، تکراری طریقہ ، طریقہ ترنم / موسیقی، طریقہ صوتی امتیاز، پیامی طریقہ ، طریقہ سمعی معاونت، بلند خوانی کا طریقہ )
سننے کی مہارت جانچنے کے طریقے
بولنے کی مہارت کی تدریسی حکمت عملیاں ( دکھاؤ اور بولو ، تقاریر، گروہی مباحثہ /گفتگو ، مشاہدات کا بیان، کہانیاں، لطائف اور نظمیں، ڈرامے/مکالمہ )
 بولنے کی مہارت جانچنے کے طریقے
پڑھنے کی مہارت کے بنیادی اجزاء(Basic components reading skills) 
 آوازوں کی پہچان (Phonemic Awareness)
آواز سے حروف کے تعلق کی پہچان (Phonics) حروف تہجی کی آوازوں کی مشق
ذخیرہ الفاظ (Vocabulary)
 پڑھنے میں روانی (Fluency)
عبارت فہمی(Text Comprehension)
پڑھنے کی مہارت کی تدریسی حکمت عملیاں
 صوتی آگہی اور علم الاصوات کی تدریسی حکمت عملیاں
ذخیرہ الفاظ سکھانے اور پڑھانے کی تدریسی حکمت عملیاں
پڑھنے میں روانی لانے کی تدریسی حکمت عملیاں
تفہیم عبارت کی تدریسی حکمت عملیاں
پڑھنے کی مہارت جانچنے کے طریقے : (صوتی آگہی اور ذخیرہ الفاظ کی جانچ )
پڑھنے میں روانی اور متن کی تفہیم کی جانچ کے طریقے
یونٹ - ۳ : اُردو پڑھانے کے دیگر طریقہ ہائے تدریس
Other methods of teaching Urdulanguage
بذریعہ قصہ /کہانی ( تمثیل ، ڈرامہ، قصہ گوئی)
بذریعہ لسانی کھیل ( مثلا لفظ کی بناوٹ میں حرف کی کھوج )
بذریعہ اطلاعاتی ذرائع (ٹی وی، ریڈیو، کمپیوٹر، مطالعہ کا ئنات )
جدید سبقی ڈیزائن اور سبقی خاکے کا تعارف
تدریسی حکمت عملی نظم و نثر
سمعی اور بصری معاونات
نثر اور نظم پرائمری اور ایلیمنٹری سطح پر کیسے پڑھائی جائے ) تدریسی منصوبہ بندی اور نمونے کے اسباق )
پڑھنا اور لکھنا سکھانے کے لیے نثر پر مبنی اسباق اور املاء ( جماعت اول تا دوم)
پڑھنا اور لکھنا سکھانے کے لیے نظم پر مبنی اسباق ( جماعت اول تا دوم )
نثر پر مبنی اسباق ( جماعت سوم تا هشتم)
منظومات پر مبنی اسباق ( جماعت سوم تا هشتم)
تدریس قواعد (استقرائی اور استخراجی طریقہ )
اسباق کی منصوبہ بندی ( تدریسی منصوبہ بندی اور اسکول میں تدریس)
تدریس نثر کے اسباق ( جماعت اول تا دوم)
تدریس نثر کے اسباق ( جماعت سوم تا پنجم)
تدریس نثر کے اسباق ( جماعت ششم تا ہشتم)
تدریس نظم کے اسباق ( جماعت اول تا دوم)
تدریس نظم کے اسباق ( جماعت سوم تا پنج(
تدریس نظم کے اسباق( جماعت ششم تا ہشتم)
تدریس قواعد ( جماعت اول تا دوم )
تدریس قواعد ( سوم تا پنجم)
تدریس قواعد (ششم تا هشتم)
یونٹ–۴: جائزہ و آزمائش کا تعارف
Introduction to Measurement and Assessment
جائزہ و آزمائش کا تعارف
سوالات کی تکنیک
کلوز پیسیج، کثیر الانتخابی ( Cloze Passage and MCQ) 
آزمائش (Test)
سوالنامے
پرچہ جات
تفویض کار / Assignment
ابتدائی سطح کے سانچے ( جماعت اول تا سوم )
وسطانی سطح کے سانچے ( جماعت چہارم تا  ششم)
مدل / وسطانی سطح کے سانچے ( جماعت ہفتم تا ہشتم)
Textbooks and references.
Higher Education Commission. (2013). Practicum I &amp; II: Handbook for student teachers, ADE/B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary, Semester 3 and 4. Higher Education Commission, Pakistan.Retrieved from https://www.hec.gov.pk/english/services/universities/RevisedCurricula/Documents/2011-2012/Education/TeachingPrac1And2_Sept13.pdf
Higher Education Commission. (2016). Reading practicum (Semester 7): Course guide / B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary. Higher Education Commission, Pakistan.
Higher Education Commission. (2016). Advanced practicum (Semester 8): Course guide / B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary. Higher Education Commission, Pakistan.
Higher Education Commission. (2016). Teaching Urdu: Course guide for B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary, Semester 3 (Revised 2016, Integration of Reading). Higher Education Commission, Pakistan.
)صدیقی، طاہر۔( م. ت.). تدریسِ اردو: ابتدائی سطح پر اردو کی تعلیم کے طریقے اور حکمتِ عملیاں.ملتان: میجد بُک ڈیپو۔حاصل شدہ:https://newbooksnbooks.pk/products/tadrees-urdu-by-tahir-siddiqui
Ranjan, R. (n.d.). Basic Urdu. Open Educational Resources, Michigan State University.Retrieved from:https://openbooks.lib.msu.edu/urdu/
McBurney-Fry, G. (2002). Improving your practicum: A guide to better teaching practice (2nd ed.). Thomson Social Science Press.

-143510-203200UNIVERSITY OF SINDH 
JAMSHORO SINDH, PAKISTAN
FACULTY OF EDUCATION, ELSA QAZI CAMPUS, HYDERABAD.
Title of Course:			Teaching of Sindhi					
Course No.:	EFPG-504					                       Credit Hours: 3 (3-0)	
Major: Pedagogy Course- III	Semester:5th  Part-III			Class:B.Ed. (4 year)
ڪورس جو تعارف
ھن ڪورس ۾ زير تربيت استاد ان لاءِ نظريه آموزش زبانThe theory of learning of language  ۽ زبان متعلق بنيادي لساني مهارتن، تدريسي حڪمت عمليون ۽ جائزي جي طريقہ ڪار کي شامل ڪيو ويو آهي.سندي بولي پڙهائڻ جا مختلف طريقا ڪورس ۾ شامل ڪيا ويا آهن. ان کان علاوه نثر، نظر جي سبقن جا خاڪا پڻ شامل ڪيا ويا آهن. گڏو گڏجائزي ۽ آزمايش کي پڻ ڪورس ۾ شامل ڪيو ويو آهي. ان کان علاوه، ابتدائي جماعتن ۾ ’پرھڻ‘پڙهائڻ جون تدريسي حڪمت عمليون کي جانچڻ جي طريقيڪار کي ڪورس جو حصو بڻايو ويو آهي، ان جي لاءِ يونٽ 2 ۽ 3 ۾ تبديليون ڪيون ويون آهن.
حاصلات ڪورسLearning Outcomes 
ھن ڪورس جي ختم ٿيڻ بعد زير تربيت استاد ان قابل بڻجي ويندا ته هو:
 The theory of learning of languageنظريه آموزش زبان جي فطري تقاضن کي سمجهي سگهن.
سندي زبان شناسي تي عبور حاصل ڪري سگهن.
بنيادي لساني مهارتن (ٻڌڻ،ڳالهائڻ، پڙهڻ، لکڻ) جي تدريس ۽جائزيجي مختلف حڪمت عملين جو استعمال ڪري سگهن.
ابتدائي جماعتن ۾ پڙهائڻ ۽ جائزي جي طريقيڪار کي استعمال ڪري سگهن.
جائزي ۽ آزمايش جي جديد طريقن کيسبقيخاڪن ۾استعمال ڪري سگهن.
سنڌي پڙهائڻ جي متعلق طريقہ تدريس ۾عملي حڪمت عملين جو مظاهرو ڪري سگهن.
ابتدائي کان وچولي سطح جيتدريس ڪورس جي سمعي ۽ بصري امدادي شيون ۽ سبقيخاڪا تيار ڪري سگهن.

ڪورس ائوٽ لائين
يونٽ پهريون : زبان جو نظريو
	زبان جو نظريو	
	زبان سکڻ جا ذريعا (پيدائش کان پهرين، ۽ بعد جا محرڪات، والدين، استاد)	
	سندي زبان جون بنيادي لساني خاصيتون (صوتي، قواعدي ۽ متن مطابق)
		
يونٽ ٻيو : بنيادي لساني مهارتون، تدريسي حڪمت عملي ۽ جائزي جو طريقيڪار
بنيادي لساني مهارتن جو تعارف (ٻڌڻ، ڳالهائڻ، پڙهڻ، لِکڻ)
ٻڌڻ جي سرگرمين جون حڪمت عمليون فطري يا قدرتي طريقو، تڪرار طريقو، ترنم / موسيقي وارو طريقو، طريقو صوتي امتياز، پيغام وارو طريقو، سمعي معاونت جو طريقو
ٻڌڻ جي مهارت جاچ جا طريقا
ڳالهائڻ جي مهارت جون تدريس حڪمت عمليون)ڏيکاريو ۽ ڳالهايو، تقرير، گروپ بحث مباحثو، ڊراما، مڪالما (
مباحسو، گفتگو، مشاهدن جو بيان، ڪھاڻيون، لطيفا ۽ نظم
ڳالهائڻ جي مهارتن کي جانچ جا طريقا
پڙهڻ جي مهارتن جا بنيادي جزا(الف) آواز جي سڃاڻپ (Phonemic Awareness)(ب) آواز سان لفظن جي تعلق جي سڃاڻپ (Phonics)(ٻ) پڙهڻ ۾ رواني (Fluency)(پ) لفظن جو ذخيرو (Vocabulary)(ڀ) عبارت فهمي (Text Comprehension)
. پڙهڻ جي مهارت جون تدريس حڪمت عمليون(الف) آواز جي سڃاڻپ سيکارڻ جون تدريس حڪمت عمليون(ب) آواز ۽ اکر جي تعلق جي سڃاڻپ جون تدريس حڪمت عمليون
(ٻ) پڙهڻ ۾رواني جون تدريس حڪمت عمليون
(پ): خوش خواني، جون وصفون (آواز، رواني، لب و لهجو، تفصيل)
لفظن جي ذخيري جون تدريس حڪمت عمليون
عبارت جي فهم جون تدريسي حڪمت عمليون
پڙهڻ جي مهارت جي جاچ جا طريقا

يونٽ ٽيون: سنڌي ٻولي پڙهائڻ جا طريقا
قصي جي ذريعي /ڪهاڻي (تمثيل،ڊرامو،قصا گوئي)
لساني راندين جي ذريعي(مثلن لفظ جي جوڙ جڪ ۾اکر کي ڳولڻ)
اطلاعتي ذريعن جي وسيلي(ريڊيو، ٽي وي، ڪمپيوٽر،ڪائنات جو مطالعو)
جديد سبقي ڊيزاين
سبقيخاڪي جو تعارف
تدريسي حڪمت عملي (نثر ۽ نظم)
سمعي ۽ بصري معاونت
نثر ۽ نظم پرائمري ۽ ايليمنٽري سطح تي ڪيئن پڙهائجي (تدريسي منصوبه بندي، ماڊل ليسن)
پڙهڻ ۽لکڻسيکارڻ لاء نثر جا سبق (درجو پهريون ۽ٻيو)
پڙهڻ ۽لکڻسيکارڻ لاء نظم جا سبق (درجو پهريون ۽ ٻيو)
نثر جا سبق (درجو ٽيون کان اٺون)
نظم جا سبق (درجو ٽيون کان اٺون)
تدريس جا قاعدا (استقرايي ۽ استخراجي طريقو)
سبقن جي منصوبه بندي (تدريسي منصوبه بندي ۽ اسڪول۾ تدريس)
تدريس نثر جا سبق (درجو پهريون کان ٻيو)
تدريس نثر جا سبق (درجو ٽيون کان پنجون)
تدريسي جا سبق (درجو ڇهون کان اَٺون)
نظم جي تدريس جا سبق (درجو پهريون کان ٻيو)
نظم جي تدريس جا سبق (درجو ٽيون کان پنجون)
نظم جي تدريس جا سبق (درجو ڇهون کان اَٺون)
تدريس جا قاعدا (درجو پهريون کان ٻيون)
تدريس جا قاعدا (درجو ٽيون کان پنجون)
تدريس جا قاعدا (درجو ڇهون کان اَٺون)
يونٽ چوٿون: جائزو ۽ آزمائش (تعارف)
جائزي ۽ آزمائش جي تعريف
سوالن جي ٽيڪنيڪ
ڪلوز پيسيج ۽ ڪثيرالانتخابي (Close passage and MCQs)
آزمائش (Test)
سوالناما
پرچا
اسائنمنٽ
ابتدائي سطح جا سانچا (درجو پهرين کان ٽيون)
وچولي سطح جا سانچا (درجو چوٿين کان ڇهون)
4.10 مڊل/وچولي سطح جا سانچا (درجو ستون کان اٺون)
Textbooks and references.
Higher Education Commission. (2013). Practicum I &amp; II: Handbook for student teachers, ADE/B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary, Semester 3 and 4. Higher Education Commission, Pakistan.Retrieved from https://www.hec.gov.pk/english/services/universities/RevisedCurricula/Documents/2011-2012/Education/TeachingPrac1And2_Sept13.pdf
Higher Education Commission. (2016). Reading practicum (Semester 7): Course guide / B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary. Higher Education Commission, Pakistan.
Higher Education Commission. (2016). Advanced practicum (Semester 8): Course guide / B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary. Higher Education Commission, Pakistan.
. ڊاڪٽر غلام علي الانا. (1984). سندهي معلم (اردو-سنڌي).ڄامشورو: سنڌي ادبي بورڊ.: https://archive.org/details/san_0926
رحمان، طارق. (1999). The Teaching of Sindhi Language.اسلام آباد: Sustainable Development Policy Institute (SDPI).https://www.scribd.com/document/586099203/The-Teaching-of-Sindhi-Language: -by-Tariq-Rehman
سومرو، گل محمد. (تاريخ موجود نه). Sauwli Sindhi Teaching Guide 2.ڪراچي: آڪسفورڊ يونيورسٽي پريس.https://oup.com.pk/sauwli-sindhi-teaching-guide-2.html: 
McBurney-Fry, G. (2002). Improving your practicum: A guide to better teaching practice (2nd ed.). Thomson Social Science Press.

		-107315-2260608890-468630		

FACULTY OF EDUCATION

Title of Course:		Foundations of language Education				
Course No.: EFSP-531					           Credit Hours: 03 (3-0)	
					Semester:5TH		 Class: B.Ed. (4 years)
Course Description

This course provides an in-depth understanding of how language develops, functions, and evolves through different theoretical, psychological, and social perspectives. It explores foundational theories, stages of language acquisition, and models proposed by linguists, psychologists, and educators. The course emphasizes how these foundations inform language teaching, learning, and assessment in educational contexts. Students will critically examine key theoretical frameworks and apply them to classroom and linguistic situations.

Course Outcomes
After completion of the course the students should be able:
To understand language its component and significant.
To explain key theories and models that underpin language development.
To describe and differentiate between stages of first and second language acquisition.
To evaluate major linguistic and psychological models of language learning.
To apply theoretical insights to real-life educational and linguistic contexts.
To demonstrate understanding of the relationship between language, thought, and culture.
Course Outlines

UNIT 1: Introduction to Language(2 Weeks)
Week-1
Definition, nature, and characteristics of language; Functions of language 
Week-2
Language and communication; Language, thought, and culture 

UNIT 2: Theories of the Origin of Language(2 Weeks)
Week-3
Divine source theory; Natural sound (Bow-wow) theory; Social interaction (Yo-he-ho) theory 
Week-4
Gesture and tool-making theories; Evolutionary and cognitive perspectives 
UNIT 3: Language Families and Classification(2 Weeks)
Week-5
Indo-European language family; Semitic, Sino-Tibetan, Dravidian, and other families 
Week-6
Genetic, typological, and areal classification of languages; Language diffusion and contact 
UNIT 4: Theories of Language Development(3 Weeks)
Week-7
Behaviorist Theory (B.F. Skinner); Nativist Theory (Noam Chomsky) 
Week-8
Cognitive Theory (Jean Piaget); Social Interactionist Theory (Lev Vygotsky) 
Week-9
Functional and Usage-Based Theories 
UNIT 5: Stages of Language Acquisition(2 Weeks)
Week-10
Pre-linguistic stage; Babbling and one-word (holophrastic) stage; Two-word stage 
Week-11
Telegraphic stage; Later multi-word stage; Critical period hypothesis 
UNIT 6: Language Change, Variation, and Globalization(3 Weeks)
Week-12
Phonological, morphological, syntactic, and semantic change; Causes of change 
Week-13
Dialect formation; Language death, revival, and preservation 
Week-14
English as a global language; Technological impact (internet slang, emojis, AI) 
UNIT 7: Language and Society(2 Weeks)
Week-15
Multilingualism and bilingualism; Language and identity; Policy and planning 
Week-16
Future of linguistic diversity; Final review and implementation strategies 

Course Structure and Teaching-Learning Framework

The instructional format of this course will include lecture, group discussions, and lots of practice. Prospective teachers’ active participation in the class, quizzes and additional reading materials will help ensure their success.

Class Participation

The course supervisor will provide additional worksheets and material. Students will get a lot more out of the classroom discussions. Questions and discussion during class are strongly encouraged about the specific aspects of the topic.

Assessment Criteria
Assessment Criteria
Mid-Term Marks
Final Term Marks
Assignment/ Presentation/ Sessional Marks
Attendance Marks
Total Marks
Weightage
30 
50 
10 
10 
100 

Suggested Textbooks and References
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. MIT Press. 
Piaget, J. (1971). Biology and Knowledge. University of Chicago Press. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in Society. Harvard University Press. 
Krashen, S. D. (1982). Principles and Practice in Second Language Acquisition. Pergamon Press. 
Halliday, M. A. K. (1978). Language as Social Semiotic. Arnold. 
Lightbown, P. M., &amp;Spada, N. (2013). How Languages are Learned. Oxford University Press. 

504825-279405438140-186055-495935-1574808669655-260985

B. Ed. 04 Year

Course No.EFSP-516

Credit Hours
3

Title of Course 
Introduction to Artificial Intelligence in Education
Semester : 5th

Course Description 
This course introduces the fundamental concepts of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and their applications in education. It focuses on how AI technologies are transforming teaching, learning, assessment, and educational management. The course also addresses ethical, social, and policy-related issues of AI in education, with special reference to developing countries.
Learning Outcomes:
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
Explain basic concepts and terminology of Artificial Intelligence.
Describe applications of AI in teaching and learning processes.
Analyze the role of AI in assessment and personalized learning.
Identify ethical, social, and privacy concerns related to AI in education.
Evaluate future trends of AI integration in educational systems.
Course Outline
Unit 1: Introduction to Artificial Intelligence
Definition, history, and scope of AI
Types of AI: narrow and general AI
Basic AI concepts and terminology
Role of AI in modern society
Unit 2: AI and Education
Concept of AI in education
Intelligent tutoring systems
Adaptive and personalized learning
AI-supported teaching tools
Unit 3: AI in Teaching and Learning
AI-based content delivery
Virtual teachers and chatbots
Learning analytics and student monitoring
Enhancing student engagement through AI
Unit 4: AI in Assessment and Evaluation
Automated assessment systems
AI-based feedback mechanisms
Data-driven decision making
Advantages and limitations of AI assessment
Unit 5: Ethical and Social Issues of AI in Education
Data privacy and security
Bias and fairness in AI systems
Role of teachers in AI-supported classrooms
Policy and regulatory concerns

Unit 6: Future Trends of AI in Education
AI and lifelong learning
Smart classrooms and virtual learning environments
AI in inclusive and special education
Future challenges and opportunities

Recommended Books / References:
Luckin, R. et al. (2016). Intelligence Unleashed: An Argument for AI in Education.
Holmes, W., Bialik, M., &amp; Fadel, C. (2019). Artificial Intelligence in Education.
UNESCO (2021). AI and Education: Guidance for Policy-makers.
Government of Pakistan. National Education Policies and HEC Guidelines.
TEACHING/INSTRUCTIONAL STRATEGIES
This course will be covered with the help of following teaching strategies
                 1. Lecture                                  2.  Group Discussions
                 3. Case Studies4. Demonstration of AI tools
                 5. Presentations
 PRACTICAL WORK
The student-teachers will also complete their course with the help of following practical work.
                 1. Group Projects 2. Individual assignments  
                 3. Case Studies Analysis              4. Class Presentations

ASSESSMENT CRITERIA
The students will be assessed through,
1. Class Tests	2. Mid Term Examaination
3. Assignments&amp; Presentations     	4.Class attendance and participation 

                FACULTY OF EDUCATION4956810-806449-193039-703579654685-593089
	B.Ed. 04 Years
	
Course No. EFSP-501

CCurriculum Planning, Design and I     Implementation

Credit Hours
3
Title of Course 

Semester
5th
Course Description 
This course provides in-depth knowledge of curriculum planning, design, and implementation processes in the context of Pakistan’s education system. It explores key models, approaches, and theories that guide curriculum development and emphasizes the practical skills required to plan, design, and implement effective and contextualized curricula at the elementary level.
Learning Outcomes:
By the end of this course, pre-service teachers will be able to:
Explain major concepts, principles, and models of curriculum planning and design.
Identify the stages and stakeholders involved in curriculum development.
Analyze the relationship between curriculum theory and classroom practice.
Design curriculum plans aligned with national education standards and contextual needs.
Evaluate curriculum implementation processes in school settings
Course Outline
Unit 1: Introduction to Curriculum Planning
Meaning, nature, and scope of curriculum planning
Importance of planning in curriculum development
Principles and foundations of curriculum planning
Role of philosophy, psychology, and sociology in curriculum planning
Unit 2: Curriculum Design
Types and components of curriculum design
Subject-centered, learner-centered, and problem-centered designs
Factors influencing curriculum design
Strengths and limitations of different designs
Unit 3: Models of Curriculum Design and Planning
Tyler’s model
Taba’s model
Wheeler’s model
Hilda Taba and Ralph Tyler comparison
Modern integrated and outcomes-based models
Unit 4: Curriculum Development Process in Pakistan
Steps in curriculum development (needs assessment, design, implementation, evaluation)
National Curriculum Framework (Pakistan)
Role of HEC, Ministry of Education, and provincial departments
Challenges in curriculum development and implementation
Unit 5: Curriculum Implementation
Meaning and process of implementation
Role of teachers, administrators, and policymakers
Barriers to effective implementation
Strategies for successful implementation in schools

Unit 6: Monitoring, Evaluation, and Improvement of Curriculum
Monitoring and feedback mechanisms
Curriculum evaluation techniques and tools
Continuous improvement and curriculum renewal
Linking curriculum implementation with learning outcomes
Teaching–Learning Strategies:
Interactive lectures and group discussions
Case studies and situational analysis
Curriculum analysis and design projects
Peer presentations
School-based observations
Assessment &amp; Evaluation:
Class participation and discussion (10%)
Individual/Group assignments (20%)
Midterm examination (30%)
Final project: Curriculum design &amp; presentation (40%)
Recommended Books / References:
Ornstein, A. C., &amp;Hunkins, F. P. (2018). Curriculum: Foundations, Principles, and Issues. Pearson.
Print, M. (2020). Curriculum Development and Design.Routledge.
Tanner, D., &amp; Tanner, L. (2007). Curriculum Development: Theory into Practice. Prentice Hall.
Government of Pakistan. (2017). National Curriculum Framework for Teacher Education (NCF-TE). Islamabad: HEC.
UNESCO (2015). Rethinking Education: Towards a Global Common Good.

UNIVERSITY OF SINDH      
JAMSHORO, SINDH—PAKISTAN

	
	FACULTY OF EDUCATION, HYDERABAD.
B. Ed (Elementary 4 Year)
Course.EFSP-561 				Semester-V				Credit Hours	03
Title of the Course		Data Analysis: Qualitative and Quantitative Techniques

Course Description

Data Analysis: Qualitative and Quantitative Techniques is a foundational course designed to introduce students to the principles, methods, and tools used to analyze qualitative and quantitative data in research and professional contexts. The course covers the entire data analysis process, from data preparation and management to interpretation and reporting of findings. Students will explore qualitative techniques such as coding, thematic analysis, and content analysis, alongside quantitative techniques including descriptive and inferential statistics. Emphasis is placed on methodological rigor, ethical considerations, and the appropriate selection of analytical techniques based on research questions. By the end of the course, students will be equipped with practical skills to analyze data using both qualitative and quantitative approaches and to critically evaluate research findings.

Learning Outcomes

Upon successful completion of this course, students will be able to:
Explain the fundamental concepts, purposes, and differences between qualitative and quantitative data analysis.
Identify and classify different types of data and select appropriate analysis techniques for various research questions.
Apply qualitative data analysis methods, including coding, categorization, and thematic interpretation.
Perform quantitative data analysis using descriptive and inferential statistical techniques.
Use data analysis software tools to manage, analyze, and visualize qualitative and quantitative data.
Evaluate validity, reliability, and trustworthiness in qualitative and quantitative research findings.
Integrate qualitative and quantitative findings using mixed-methods approaches where appropriate.
Interpret and report data analysis results clearly and accurately using tables, graphs, and narrative explanations.
Demonstrate ethical awareness in data handling, analysis, and reporting.
Critically assess research studies based on their data analysis methods and conclusions.
Course Outline
Week 1: Introduction to Data Analysis

Data analysis 
Between qualitative &amp; quantitative research 
Role of data in research and decision-making 
Types of data (primary vs secondary) 
Week 2: Data Collection &amp; Preparation
Sources of data 
Data cleaning and organization 
Coding of data 
Handling missing data 

Week 3: Quantitative Data Basics
Types of quantitative data (discrete, continuous) 
Measurement scales (nominal, ordinal, interval, ratio) 
Introduction to variables 
Week 4: Descriptive Statistics (Part 1)
Measures of central tendency (mean, median, mode) 
Interpretation and applications 

Week 5: Descriptive Statistics (Part 2)
Measures of dispersion (range, variance, standard deviation) 
Data variability and interpretation 
Week 6: Data Visualization
Tables, charts, graphs (bar, pie, histogram) 
Best practices for presenting data 
Introduction to tools (Excel/SPSS basics) 
Week 7: Probability Basics
Concept of probability 
Rules of probability 
Applications in research 
Week 8: Mid-Term Review / Exam
Revision of Weeks 1–7 
Mid-term assessment 
Week 9: Inferential Statistics (Part 1)
Population vs sample 
Sampling techniques 
Introduction to hypothesis testing 
Week 10: Inferential Statistics (Part 2)
t-test (independent, paired) 
Chi-square test 
Basic interpretation of results 
Week 11: Correlation &amp; Regression
Correlation (Pearson, Spearman) 
Linear regression basics 
Interpretation of relationships 
Week 12: Introduction to Qualitative Data Analysis
Nature of qualitative data 
Between qualitative &amp; quantitative analysis 
Common approaches 
Week 13: Qualitative Data Analysis Techniques
Coding (open, axial, selective) 
Thematic analysis 
Content analysis 
Week 14: Tools for Qualitative Analysis
Manual vs software-based analysis 
Introduction to tools like NVivo/Atlas.ti (conceptual) 
Data interpretation 

Week 15: Mixed Methods &amp; Reporting
Combining qualitative &amp; quantitative data 
Writing data analysis and results section 
Presenting findings 
Week 16: Final Review &amp; Project/Exam
Course revision 
Final exam or research project submission
Teaching/ Instruction Strategies 

Lectures
Interactive Discussions
Question-Answer Session
Demonstration
Case Study Analysis  
Practical Work
Hands-on Computer Exercises
Individual Assignments
Group Assignments
Internet-Research tasks
Presentations 
Recommended Books/ References 
https://www.metodos.work/wp-content/uploads/2024/01/Qualitative-Data-Analysis.pdf
https://www.ucg.ac.me/skladiste/blog_609332/objava_105202/fajlovi/Creswell.pdf
https://www.intrac.org/app/uploads/2024/12/Quantitative-and-qualitative-methods.pdf

UNIVERSITY OF SINDH
JAMSHORO, SINDH—PAKISTAN
B.Ed.(04 Years)

CourseNo.EFSP-576
Introduction to STEM   Education

CreditHours
3
TitleofCourse 

Semester

5th

Course Introduction:
This course provides a basic introduction to the principles and practices of STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) education. Students will explore the importance of STEM in the modern educational landscape, various teaching methods, and curriculum design. The course includes theoretical understanding and practical exercises to develop a foundational knowledge of STEM education.

Learning Outcomes:
On the completion of the course, the students will: 
1. Understand the basic concepts and importance of STEM education. 
2. Identify effective teaching strategies for STEM subjects. 
3. Design and implement STEM-based lesson plans. 
4. Integrate technology into STEM education. 
5. Explore current trends and future directions in STEM education.

	Course Outlines	

Chapter 1: Introduction and Basic Concepts of STEM Education              Weeks1&amp;2
1.1. Overview of STEM Education
1.2. History and Evolution of STEM
1.3. Definition and Scope of STEM
1.4. Interdisciplinary Nature of STEM

Chapter 2: Teaching Strategies and Curriculum Design in STEM             Weeks3,4&amp;5
		2.1: Inquiry-Based Learning
		2.2. Problem-Based Learning
		2.3. Principles of STEM Curriculum Design
		2.4. Designing STEM Lesson Plans

Chapter 3: Integrating Technology in STEM                              Weeks6&amp;7
	3.1. Role of Technology in STEM Education
	3.2. Tools and Resources for STEM Teaching

Chapter 4: Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics in STEM Education 

Weeks8,9&amp;10
	4.1. Key Concepts in Science Education                                                               
	4.2. Effective Science Teaching Methods
	4.3. Key Concepts in Technology Education
	4.4. Effective Technology Teaching Methods
	4.5. Key Concepts in Engineering Education
	4.6. Effective Engineering Teaching Methods
	4.7. Key Concepts in Mathematics Education
	4.8. Effective Mathematics Teaching Methods

Chapter 5: Assessment in STEM Education                           Weeks11&amp;12
		5.1. Principles of Assessment in STEM Education
		5.2. Formative and Summative Assessments
		
Chapter 6: Collaborative Learning and Diversity in STEM Education     Weeks13&amp;14
6.1. Importance of Collaboration in STEM Education
6.2. Strategies for Promoting Collaboration
6.3. Addressing Diversity in STEM Education
6.4. Inclusive Teaching Practices

Chapter 7: Current Trends and Education Policies in STEM Education    Weeks 15&amp;16
7.1. Emerging Trends in STEM Education                                    
7.2. Future Directions in STEM Education
7.3. Overview of STEM Education Policies
7.4. Impact of Policies on STEM Education

Teaching Learning Strategies: Interactive Lectures, assignments and projects, group discussions, collaborative problem-solving and guest Lectures

Assessment Criteria:
Mid-Term Marks    Final Term Marks  Assignment/ Presentation MarksAttendance	Total Marks
         30	.                      50	                            10                                    10                          100

Reading Material

Textbooks. o STEM Education: An Integrated Approach by Allan M. Collins and Richard Halverson 
Suggested Readings of STEM Lesson Essentials, Grades 3-8: Integrating Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics by Jo Anne Vasquez, Michael Comer, and Joel Villegas.

