Child Development
COURSE GUIDE
Associate Degree in Education/
B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary
2012
semester     1
This product has been made possible by the support of the American People through the United States Agency for
International Development (USAID). The contents of this report are the sole responsibility of the authors, and do 
not necessarily reﬂect the views of USAID or the United States Government.
Technical Support: Education Development Centre (EDC); Teachers College, Columbia University
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
ii
Foreword
Teacher education in Pakistan is leaping into the future. This updated Scheme of  Studies is the latest 
milestone in a journey that began in earnest in 2006 with the development of  a National Curriculum, 
which was later augmented by the 2008 National Professional Standards for Teachers in Pakistan and 
the 2010 Curriculum of  Education Scheme of  Studies. With these foundations in place, the Higher 
Education Commission (HEC) and the USAID Teacher Education Project engaged faculty across the 
nation to develop detailed syllabi and course guides for the four-year B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary and 
two-year Associate Degree in Education (ADE). 
The syllabi and course guides have been reviewed by the National Curriculum Review Committee 
(NCRC) and the syllabi are approved as the updated Scheme of  Studies for the ADE and B.Ed. (Hons) 
Elementary programs. 
As an educator, I am especially inspired by the creativity and engagement of  this updated Scheme of  
Studies. It offers the potential for a seismic change in how we educate our teachers and ultimately our 
country’s youngsters. Colleges and universities that use programs like these provide their students 
with the universally valuable tools of  critical thinking, hands-on learning, and collaborative study .
I am grateful to all who have contributed to this exciting process; in particular the faculty and staff  
from universities, colleges, and provincial institutions who gave freely of  their time and expertise for 
the purpose of  preparing teachers with the knowledge, skills, and dispositions required for nurturing 
students in elementary grades. Their contributions to improving the quality of  basic education in 
Pakistan are incalculable. I would also like to thank the distinguished NCRC members, who helped 
further enrich the curricula by their recommendations. The generous support received from the 
United States Agency for International Development (USAID) enabled HEC to draw on technical 
assistance and subject-matter expertise of  the scholars at Education Development Center, Inc., and 
Teachers College-Columbia University . Together, this partnership has produced a vitally important 
resource for Pakistan. 
 
 
PROF . DR. SOHAIL NAQVI,
Executive Director,
Higher Education Commission,
Islamabad

HOW THIS COURSE GUIDE WAS DEV ELOPEDiii
How this course guide was developed
As part of nation-wide reforms to improve the quality of teacher education, the 
Higher Education Commission (HEC) with technical assistance from the USAID 
Teacher Education Project engaged faculty across the nation to develop detailed 
syllabi and course guides for the four-year B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary and two-year 
Associate Degree in Education (ADE). 
The process of designing the syllabi and course guides began with a curriculum 
design workshop (one workshop for each subject) with faculty from universities 
and colleges and ofﬁcials from provincial teacher education apex institutions. 
With guidance from national and international subject experts, they reviewed the 
HEC scheme of studies, organized course content across the semester, developed 
detailed unit descriptions and prepared the course syllabi. Although the course 
syllabi are designed primarily for Student Teachers, they are useful resource for 
teacher educators too. 
In addition, participants in the workshops developed elements of a course guide. 
The course guide is designed for faculty teaching the B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary 
and the ADE. It provides suggestions for how to teach the content of each course 
and identiﬁes potential resource materials. In designing both the syllabi and the 
course guides, faculty and subject experts were guided by the National Professional 
Standards for Teachers in Pakistan 2009 and the National Curriculum 2006. The 
subject experts for each course completed the initial drafts of syllabi and course 
guides. Faculty and Student Teachers started using drafts of syllabi and course 
guides and they provided their feedback and suggestions for improvement. 
Final drafts were reviewed and approved by the National Curriculum Review 
Committee (NCRC).
The following faculty were involved in designing this course guide: Dr. Anjum Bano 
Kazmi, Karachi University; GCEE Bakhtiar Ahmad, RITE (M) Peshawar; Bushra 
Ghaus, Fatima Jinnah Women University , Rawalpindi; Khadija Khatoon, GECE 
Hussainabad, Karachi; Nasreen Zaheer, RITE (F) Abbottabad; Shoaib Mohsin Ali, 
University of  Sindh; Sarfaraz Ahmad, GCET Faisalabad; Masood Anwar, GCET 
Faisalabad; Saeeda Mujahid, GCEE Pishin; Naseem Begum, GCEE Pishin; Sadaf  
Naz, Hazara University , Mansehra; Dr. Wasim Khan, IER Peshawar University; 
Saeed Tariq, GCEE Panjgoor; Shams-un-Nisa, GCET (W) DG Khan; Zahra Jabeen, 
Karakorum International University , Gilgit; Dr. Javed Iqbal,  Karakorum 
International University , Gilgit; Tariq Mehmood, IER Punjab University , Lahore; 
Muhammad Iqbal, GCE(M) Gilgit.
ivASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Subject expert guiding course design: Professor Emeritus Dr. Frances Schoonmaker, 
Teachers College Columbia University
Date of NCRC review: 3 March 2012
NCRC Reviewers: Dr. Jamil Ahmed, Shah Abdul Lateef University; Dr Abdul 
Hameed, University of Management and Technology Lahore; Ms. Aziz un Nisa, 
Karachi University

T able of Contents
Syllabus  08
Planning Guide 15
  SUMMARY OF ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
  ABOUT THE PLANNING GUIDE
  SAMPLE ASSIGNMENTS
  ASSESSMENTS
 
UNIT 1  Introduction to Child Development 28
  Overview
  Session Planning Guide
  Sample Lesson Plans
 
UNIT 2  Early Childhood Development 48
  Overview
  Session Planning Guide
 
UNIT 3 Primary Child Development 61
  Overview
  Session Planning Guide
 
UNIT 4 Adolescence and Development 84
  Overview
  Session Planning Guide
 
UNIT 5 Difference in Classrooms: Developmental Variation  
 and Special Needs 103
  Overview
  Session Planning Guide
  Alternative Sessions
  Additional Information
 
UNIT 6 T eachers, Family, Schools, and Society 131
  Overview
  Session Planning Guide
  Additional T opics
Syllabus 
CHILD DEVELOPMENT 
COURSE SYLLABUS : Child Development
09
CHILD DEVELOPMENT
Faculty
B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary
Year/semester
Year 1, semester 1
Duration (hours)
3 credits, 48 class hours, 16 weeks
Prerequisites
None
Course description
The primary focus of  this course is learning about children in order to become an 
effective teacher. It provides Student Teachers with an overview of  child develop -
ment and growth as a holistic process. The latest research and thinking about the 
conditions that affect children’s learning and development will be addressed across 
developmental domains and stages of  development. Development of  language 
and cognition as well as emotional, social, and physical characteristics of  children 
will be explored. Student Teachers will form their own child development theo -
ries. Implications of  child development theory for schools, teachers, and society 
will be considered. Student Teachers will be provided with real experiences to 
study and observe children at different levels of  development. They will have an 
opportunity to enhance their understanding of  how people learn, individual dif -
ferences and learning styles, and how theories of  learning and development relate 
to classroom learning and teaching. The course will enable Student Teachers to 
create learning environments that suit the needs of  an individual child as well as 
children in general.

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
10
Course outcomes
After completing this course, Student Teachers will be able to:
•	 describe major theories and themes about how children develop 
•	 compare the characteristics of  various developmental stages according to   
 different theorists 
•	 identify factors influencing the learning process 
•	 design age-appropriate teaching methods based on developmental theory 
•	 identify individual differences of  students and children with special needs 
•	 reflect on their conceptions about child development and its implications for   
 teaching and learning. 
Learning and teaching approaches
A variety of  learning and teaching approaches will be used throughout the course, 
such as group work, peer learning, class debates, and discussions. Student Teachers 
will collaborate on performance-based tasks such as role playing, making information-
al posters, and writing letters to teachers. The course links learning approaches with 
assessments to provide Student Teachers with opportunities to accept responsibility 
for their own learning.

COURSE SYLLABUS : Child Development
11
Semester outline
UNIT 1: Introduction to child development (2 weeks/6 hours)
Unit 1 gives an overview of  the course and the key models, theorists, and debates 
in child development. Child development is presented as a holistic process.
Week # T opics/themes
1
Overview of  growth and development 
Psychosocial models
Behaviourism and socio-cultural models 
2
Cognitive models
Factors that affect the child: Key issues and controversies 
Approaches to classroom development
UNIT 2: Early childhood development (2 weeks/6 hours)
Unit 2 examines the first three stages of  child development: infant, toddler, and 
preschool. It focuses on knowledge essential for primary and middle school 
teachers about how children grow and how to apply this knowledge to inform 
teaching practice in children’s later years.
Week # T opics/themes
3
Unit introduction: Infant development 
The three domains of  toddler development
Developmentally appropriate practices for toddlers
4
The three domains of  preschool child development
Developmentally appropriate practices for preschool child development
Unit review
1
2

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
12
Unit 3: Primary school-age child development (3 weeks/9 hours) 
Unit 3 explores the physical, cognitive, emotional, and social development of  
elementary school-age children (6–12 years old). Emphasis is placed on under-
standing the whole child. Student Teachers will analyse stages of  development 
during this critical period of  growth. They will have opportunities to consider 
how early childhood development can inform their study of  primary child 
development.
Week # T opics/themes
5
Introduction to primary school-age child development
Aspects of  physical development
Encouraging healthy physical development
6
Cognitive development: Overview and Piaget’s concrete operational theory
Cognitive development: Industriousness and intelligences
Emotional development
7
Social development: Changes and parental roles
Social development: Peer interaction, friendship, and growth
Utilizing play in the classroom 
8 Teacher’s influence on student motivation and unit conclusion
Unit 4: Adolescence and development (3 weeks/9 hours)
Unit 4 explores the complex changes children undergo as they reach adoles-
cence. The impact these changes have upon adolescent cognitive development, 
social development, and behaviours such as motivation and identity formation 
is examined. Critiques of  adolescent developmental theory are considered.
Week # T opics/themes
8
Introduction and overview of  physical development
Social and emotional development I: Erikson and development of  self-identity 
9
Social and emotional development II: The adolescent peer group
Social and emotional development III: Motivation and self-regulation
Cognitive and linguistic development I: Piaget
10
Cognitive and linguistic development II: Vygotsky
Cognitive and individual differences
Conclusion and review 
3
4

COURSE SYLLABUS : Child Development
13
UNIT 5: Differences in classrooms: Developmental variation and specia 
needs (3 weeks/9 hours)
Unit 5 focuses on learning differences. The role of  the school and Instructor 
in managing and accommodating learning differences in classroom practice is 
considered. Perspectives on national educational policy in Pakistan on accommo-
dating diverse developmental needs are explored.
Week # T opics/themes
11
Differences in student learning and performance strengths
Child development review I
Child development review II
12
Recognizing disability and learning disorders I: Emotional and behavioural
Recognizing disability and learning disorders II: Language, physical, and sensory
Cognitive differences: Delays and giftedness
13
Addressing special needs in the classroom: Differentiated instruction
School resources and support services for special-needs students
Reflection and review
UNIT 6: Teachers, family , schools, and society (3 weeks/9 hours) 
Unit 6 investigates how families, society , schools, and teachers influence child 
development. Student Teachers will reflect on major concepts of  child develop-
ment and their implications for teaching and learning. The role of  the teacher 
will be considered.
Week # T opics/themes
14
The role of  the nuclear and extended family 
Role of  community , culture, and society within families 
Role of  culture and society: Gender balance 
15
Role of  culture and society: Influence of  media 
Role of  school, peers, and teachers
Teachers’ influence on child development
16
Schools, families, and communities as partners in child development
Unit review
Course reflection and review
5
6

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
14
T extbooks and references 
Books
S. Bredekamp and C. Copple (eds.), Developmentally Appropriate Practice in Early 
Childhood Programs Serving Children from Birth through Age 8 (Washington, DC: National 
Association for the Education of  Young Children, 1999).
C. Howes and S. Ritchie, A Matter of  Trust: Connecting Teachers and Learners in the Early 
Childhood Classroom (New York: Teachers College Press, 2002). 
C. Howes, Culture and Child Development in Early Childhood Programs: Practices for 
Quality Education and Care (New York: Teachers College Press, 2012). 
Laurence Steinberg, Adolescence, 9th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2011).
Web resources
Child Development Institute website, designed to provide information and tools 
parents need to understand their children.
 Ø http://childdevelopmentinfo.com 
Early Childhood Development (ECD) Pakistan website.
 Ø http://www .ecdpak.com
Encyclopedia on Early Childhood Development (available in English and Urdu).
 Ø http://www .child-encyclopedia.com/en-ca/home.html
Nurture: Pakistan’s Pioneer Publication on Early Childhood Development. 
 Ø http://www .ecdpak.com/nurture/about_nurture.html
Search Institute® is a leading global innovator in discovering what children and 
adolescents need to succeed in their families, schools, and communities. They present 
a ‘Developmental Asset Lists’ at 
 Ø http://www .search-institute.org/developmental-assets/lists
Assignments 
Assignments will be listed on a separate handout. These assignments will contribute 
to your learning and count toward your final grade. 
Grading policy
A variety of  assessments will be used in the course, including mid-term and  
final examinations.

 Planning Guide      

16
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Summary of essential knowledge
The course provides examples of  theorists who look at child development from dif-
ferent perspectives. Each has implications for teachers. Although the course includes 
units on children with special needs and the influence of  society and culture, the cen-
tral emphasis is always on development. (Student Teachers will have the opportunity 
to study special needs and society/culture in more depth through other course work.) 
This summary is for the Instructor’s use in preparing for the course. It has been 
prepared for educational use only and may not be used for commercial purposes. 
Instructors may feel free to duplicate any parts of  the summary they would like to 
share with Student Teachers, but they should give proper attribution when citing 
material for other purposes.
Psychosocial theory
Erik Erikson is an example of  a psychosocial theorist. He followed Sigmund Freud’s 
psychoanalytic theory but altered it. He is best known for his theories on the stages of  
human development, from infancy to old age. Erikson identified a series of  life stages, 
each of  which is related to a life crisis. For Erikson, the way an individual resolves (or 
fails to resolve) the crisis affects their overall social, psychological, and cognitive devel-
opment. Erikson theorized that each crisis becomes the goal of  a particular stage, and 
the crisis must be resolved before one can move to the next stage. 
There are many implications of  Erikson’s theory for education, among them:
•	 Children need support for resolving developmental tasks. For example, a   
 young child who has not been able to develop trusting relationships with adults  
 at home may have difficulty trusting their teachers. Therefore, teachers working  
 with preschoolers will need to be aware of  the need to respond in ways that build  
 trust among their children to enable them to progress to the next stage of   
 their development. 
•	 Children also need classroom environments that provide opportunities for   
 private thinking, interaction with materials, and social interaction.
Behaviourist theory and social learning theory
Behaviourism has had enormous influence on educational psychology . Its influence 
lingers in outcomes-based perspectives that view learning as a product that can be 
measured. Behaviourism, also known as the learning perspective, proposes that 
all things that people do, from acting to thinking and feeling, can be regarded as 
behaviours. This perspective studies behaviour instead of  constructs of  the mind. The 
two most important behaviourist theorists are John B. Watson and B. F . Skinner.
Watson believed that directly observable events—stimuli and responses—should 
be the focus of  study , not the internal constructs of  the mind. Watson thought that 
children could be taught to develop in any way adults wanted if  adults controlled the 
stimulus-response associations. Watson conducted the historic ‘Little Albert experi-
ment’ on classical conditioning in the 1920s with his graduate student-assistant Rosalie 
Rayner. In the experiment, an infant less than one year old was exposed to a white 
rat, to which he initially exhibited no fear. However, after researchers paired the rat’s 

COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
17
appearance several times with loud noises, the child exhibited distress and began to 
cry when the rat alone was presented. The child was also fearful of  other objects that 
resembled the rat as well, such as fluffy white toys. In the late 2000s, investigations 
into the identity and health of  the child as well as the experiment’s design raised 
questions about medical ethics and the validity of  the findings. In its time, though, 
Watson and Rayner’s results were remarkably influential in moulding concepts of  
child rearing. Watson’s work also informed other psychologists’ efforts, such as Joseph 
Wolpe, who successfully applied behaviourist techniques to help individuals with 
phobias and can also be found today in some of  the treatment approaches used to 
combat alcoholism, smoking, and other forms of  addiction. 
B. F . Skinner, a behaviourist heavily influenced by the ideas of  Watson and pioneers 
such as Ivan Pavlov and Edward Thorndike, also proposed a conditioning theory that 
reinforcement and punishment form children’s behaviour. According to Skinner, a 
child’s behaviour can be encouraged by following it with a wide variety of  forms of  
reinforcement, such as praise, a friendly smile, or a new toy . Other behaviours can be 
discouraged by punishments, such as withdrawal of  privileges or disapproval. 
Social learning theory accepted principles of  conditioning and reinforcement of  earlier 
behaviourists and built upon these principals. These theorists also considered inner 
motivational factors and challenged the assumption that learning represents a change in 
behaviour. Dr Alfred Bandura is typically associated with social learning theory . 
Dr Bandura proposed that observational learning and modelling is the basis for a wide 
variety of  children’s behaviour, such as aggression, helping, sharing, and gender respons-
es. Children acquire skills in the absence of  direct rewards and punishment by watching 
and listening to others around them. Social learning theory outlines three requirements 
for people to learn and model behaviour: retention (remembering what one observed), 
reproduction (the ability to reproduce the behaviour), and motivation (good reason to 
want to adopt the behaviour). Dr Bandura later introduced other cognitive elements 
to his theory including a focus on intrinsic reinforcement through such motivational 
factors as a sense of  pride, satisfaction, and accomplishment. His idea that families and 
teachers should promote the self-efficacy of  the child is very important in education. 
Self-efficacy is a person’s belief  in his or her ability to succeed in a particular situation, 
and it is a powerful influence on how people think, behave, and feel.
Behaviourism and social learning theory have implications for education. Behaviour 
modification is often used with children who have behavioural problems. It refers to a 
set of  practical procedures that combine reinforcement, modelling, and manipulation 
of  situational cues to eliminate children’s undesirable behaviours and increase their 
adoption of  socially acceptable responses.
Teachers who promote the child’s feeling of  self-efficacy will help the child take risks 
and try new ideas. Teachers can promote self-efficacy by creating environments that 
are age appropriate and welcoming to children, accepting that every child has some-
thing important to offer and every child can learn, and using teaching methods that 
allow children to experience success and gain confidence.

18
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Another theory that has proved influential in child development and cognitive psy-
chology is Lev Vygotsky’s socio-cultural theory. Socio-cultural theory proposes that all 
human development is responsive to and influenced by social context and is the result 
of  the interactions between children and their social environment. For Vygotsky , 
social interaction precedes development. Consciousness and cognition are the end 
products of  socialization and social behaviour. Social context and environment can 
include interactions with parents, teachers, friends, and siblings and with objects such 
as books and toys. Children are active in making these interactions by constructing 
their own knowledge, skills, and attitudes and not just copying the world around 
them. Language is critical; people use social and cultural tools such as speech and 
writing to mediate their environment. 
The zone of proximal development is an idea that Vygotsky developed to address a 
child’s development in relation to certain concepts or abilities. He had in mind those 
skills a child has begun to develop but has not yet mastered. He refers here to an 
understanding or skill that is a ‘bud’ or ‘flower’ rather than a fully developed ‘fruit’, in 
his metaphor. It is this stage of  development that the teacher should seek to nurture 
and develop, helping a child to realize understandings and abilities.
Vygotsky’s theory is considered one of  the foundations of  the constructivist theory in 
education. Support of  language development and helping to build bridges from the 
known to the unknown through a rich, interactive learning environment will support 
children’s learning. 
Cognitive model of development
Cognitive models of  child development focus on growth of  the mind. The emphasis is 
on children’s logical thinking processes and how they change over time. In this theory , 
children play an active role in their own development.
Jean Piaget is the best-known cognitive development theorist. His research is known 
around the world and is very broad, touching on emotional development, peer rela-
tionships, moral reasoning, and cognitive development. Piaget argues that children’s 
thinking is different in kind than adult thinking and that children’s thinking is not a 
watered-down version of  adult approaches, but that it follows a separate logic based 
on the appearance of  things. 
Piaget described the evolution of  intellectual development from infancy to adulthood 
in four mostly sequential stages that are characterised as follows:
•	 Sensori-motor: Birth through 18–24 months
•	 Pre-operational: 18–24 months through age 7
•	 Concrete operational: Ages 7 to 12
•	 Formal operational: Age 12 and through adulthood 

COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
19
Following Piaget’s theory , teachers should:
•	 Give children opportunities to experiment with physical objects such as   
 water, sand, balls, colour paints, and by going on nature walks. Adolescents can  
 experiment with science lab equipment, cameras, food, and cooking tools.
•	 Help children reason through problem-solving tasks and deep questions. 
•	 Remember the four stages when developing lesson plans to help guide thinking.
•	 Present new situations that challenge students to rethink their current understandings.
•	 Plan group activities so that children can share their beliefs and perspectives   
 with one another. 
In the 1960s, Jerome Bruner, another influential theorist, developed an approach 
that, in contrast to Piaget’s, balanced both environmental and experiential factors. 
His theory was influenced by Vygotsky and his seminal texts The Process of  Education 
(1960) and The Culture of  Education (1996), and it also paid attention to the social and 
political context of  education. 
According to his cognitive theory , categories are how we organize what we learn. He 
describes three modes of  representation: 
•	 Enactive representation (physical activity-based), or concrete thinking
•	 Iconic representation (image-based), or semi-concrete thinking
•	 Symbolic representation (language-based), or abstract thinking
Bruner does not propose ‘ages and stages’ in the same way as Piaget. For him, the abil-
ity to engage in modes of  representation is only loosely associated with age. Bruner 
suggests that even young children can learn complex material if  the instruction is 
organized in a way that allows progression from concrete to abstract. Often thought 
of  as the father of  constructivist education, Bruner presents a view of  children as 
‘active problem-solvers’ who are ready to explore difficult subjects, provided they are 
offered the appropriate scaffolding. 
Scaffolding is a temporary framework erected to support a structure as it is being built, 
and a spiral curriculum is a curriculum that revisits and builds on basic concepts with 
increasing complexity . Bruner first suggested that scaffolding occurs in early language 
learning when parents seem to know intuitively how to scaffold their children’s 
attempts in communicating. 
In the classroom, a child may not be able to articulate or explore learning inde-
pendently , and so the teacher scaffolds learning by providing ways of  handling the task 
that support greater independence; for example, by offering materials, a problem to 
work out, key questions, an outline, and an interesting task.

20
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
In summary , Bruner’s theory suggests:
•	 When facing new material, a child can follow a progression from concrete to   
 abstract and achieve success.
•	 Teachers should provide scaffolding for students to differentiate instruction  
 by using concrete, semi-concrete, and abstract examples and materials in   
 their teaching.
•	 Children benefit from experiences that allow them to categorize information   
 through use of  materials as well as ideas.
Key issues and controversies in developmental theory 
Nature vs. nurture. Nature refers to the fact that many human characteristics are 
inherited. They are part of  our biological make-up. For example, most children have 
upright mobility (walking and running), develop language, and learn to use simple 
tools. Other genetic characteristics differ from one person to another. For example, 
people have different-coloured hair and eyes. Some people are tall, others are not. 
Also, people have different talents and skills. Such psychological traits as temperament 
(for example, being shy or outgoing), aggression, and intelligence may also be partly 
influenced by genes. Many characteristics develop slowly as a child matures. Within 
a wide variety of  environments, people develop characteristics that are part of  their 
genetic make-up.
Nurture refers to the influence of  a person’s environments. Family , peers, schools, 
neighbourhoods, culture, the media, and society shape a child’s growth and develop-
ment. Physical characteristics are affected by nutrition. Mental ability is enhanced by 
interaction with people in a stimulating environment. Social skills are influenced by 
the people around a child.
Historically , the relative influences of  nature and nurture have been a source of  debate 
among developmental theorists. Increasingly , however, those who study development 
are beginning to realize that nature and nurture are interconnected.
Universality vs. context specific. Some development seems universal. Almost all 
young children learn to sit, crawl, walk, and run in that order. Other changes are high-
ly individualistic, reflecting a context-specific nature. For example, children differ in 
strength and the ability to keep running fast as they engage in physical activity . Some 
theorists propose that genetics lead to universality . Others say that children acquire 
similar ways of  thinking about the world because, despite their unique interactions 
with objects and people, they are all likely to see similar things occur (for example, 
objects always fall down rather than up, and people often get angry when something 
is grabbed away from them). 
Continuity vs. discontinuity . Sometimes development comes in sudden, dramatic 
changes in behaviour or thinking, reflecting discontinuity , or discontinuous change. 
For example, when children learn to run, they move their bodies forward in a way that 
is very different from walking. When they begin to talk in two-word sentences rather 
than with single words, they are, for the first time, using early forms of  grammar that 
restrict the ways in which they combine words. More often, however, development 
occurs as a gradual process, with many small additions to behaviours and thought 

COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
21
processes, reflecting continuity , or continuous change. Theorists’ fascination with dis-
continuous change is reflected in their tendencies to identify development in ‘stages’, 
or fixed periods of  time during childhood and adolescence when changes occur. 
Stages need to be thought of  as theories that help us to explain progress. Many chil-
dren display traits of  two or more different stages at the same time. Thinking about 
stages is helpful because it is clear that children of  different ages tend to think and act 
in extremely different ways.
There is a great deal of  value at looking across the developmental span of  preschool 
through adolescence. Primary and middle school teachers who understand how chil-
dren grow are more equipped to engage in informed, intelligent practice in a child’s 
later years. Developmental ‘ages and stages’ are descriptive of  what children tend to 
do, however, not prescriptive of  what every child should do. 
Differences in development and special needs
It is important to keep in mind that no child develops in exactly the same way as 
another. Some difference is normal. Children usually grow cognitively , socially , emo-
tionally , and physically at different rates. Of  course, some children develop outside of  
normal limits, and education works to accommodate those children, as well. Given 
the varied strengths (and weaknesses) of  children and young adults in the realities 
of  classroom practice, schools must be prepared to consider student differences. A 
number of  strategies attempt to address special-needs children in the regular class-
room; for example, through differentiated instruction and inclusive education. Student 
Teachers need to consider the role of  the school and the Instructor in managing and 
accommodating learning differences in classroom practice.
While child development theories differ in their focus areas and attempt to explain 
how children learn, they are similar in their underlying assumption that all children 
can learn. The theories seek to explain why children learn differently and demonstrate 
different strengths and needs at different stages of  growth. 
In some cases, children have more constant needs, such as those with disabilities. 
Pakistan’s educational policy has shifted in the past decade and is working toward 
including more children with cognitive and physical disabilities in mainstream class-
rooms as well as developing separate facilities that work with students with special 
needs. Regardless of  the approaches toward accommodating learning differences, it is 
important for teachers to recognize and seek to build on student strengths. Families, 
society , schools, and teachers all influence a child’s development and should work 
together to provide an environment in which the child can grow and thrive.

22
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Common misconceptions about child development 
Teachers in training are likely to enter their program with some or all of  the following 
common misconceptions about child development and how it interacts with human 
learning. The Instructor needs to be aware of  them and constantly search for ways to 
help Student Teachers confront and critique them.
Common misconceptions about human learning:
•	 The child is an empty vessel into which the teacher pours knowledge.
•	 Coverage of  a broad set of  key concepts in a discipline is essential (versus   
 understanding a few concepts in depth).
•	 Memorization of  key concepts and facts demonstrates learning (versus deep   
 understanding and the ability to apply information in new situations).
•	 Teachers should aim to teach to the level of  the average student (versus   
 differentiating instruction so that each child is learning at their own level   
 and pace). 
Common misconceptions about developmental theory:
•	 Development is fixed and invariant across cultures (versus culturally situated).
•	 Theory tells us what children can and should do at different ages and stages   
 (versus a description of  possibilities).
•	 Intelligence is fixed and cannot be changed.

COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
23
About the Planning Guide
The Planning Guide is organized to provide examples of  what can be done with 
the course content without suggesting that there is one best way to plan and teach. 
Faculty members may prefer to create their own plans using the guide as an additional 
resource. All faculty are encouraged to accept the challenge of  teaching in ways that 
promote active learning. Those who have not used active learning strategies may 
begin by experimenting with one or two ideas and trying out a small change, such 
as asking Student Teachers to read something in advance and talk about it in small 
groups at the beginning of  a session, gradually moving to progressively more stu-
dent-centred classroom practices.
The Planning Guide is structured in the following way: 
Unit Week Session 2
Session 1
Session 3
Lesson Option 1
Lesson Option 1
Lesson Option 1
Lesson Option 2
Lesson Option 2
Lesson Option 2
Combined, the units cover 16 weeks of  instruction. Each week, Student Teachers are 
expected to attend three sessions, each one hour long. This document provides faculty 
with up to two lesson options for each session that they can use to guide planning and 
teaching. For a few sessions, three options are provided. 
In addition, lesson plans are provided for two lessons in Unit 1 for faculty who would 
prefer an illustration of  planning from the unit options. Lesson plans, too, appear at 
the end of  the unit. 

24
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Sample assignments
Assignments are suggested in many of  the session plans. The Instructor will want to 
use his or her own judgment in using these or choosing others. In general, short-term 
assignments will include activities such as reading an article, preparing something 
for class, or bringing in materials. Longer-term assignments should allow Student 
Teachers to integrate their learning. Some examples are below . Assignments of  long-
term projects will need to be built into session plans at the Instructor’s discretion.
 } Sample assignment 1: Individual reflective journal from field observations
All Student Teachers taking the course will be expected to conduct observations of  
children. Student Teachers will be expected to find their own observation sites and 
secure permission to observe either at a local school or community organization 
working with children. Student Teachers’ observations of  children will involve one 
hour outside of  class each week. Observation notes will need to be maintained, and 
Student Teachers will also need to write a one-page reflection per week focusing on 
topics that the Instructor assigns. Weekly observation journal topics will encourage 
Student Teachers to connect course content with field observations. Specific data 
collection and observation techniques will be explained by the Instructor.
 } Sample assignment 2: Child study
Note: This assignment could incorporate the individual reflective journal. It is also a 
good assignment to coordinate with other faculty . For example, the Science Instructor 
or Islamic Studies Instructor might want to require observation of  how children are 
learning these subjects. Components assigned by other faculty should be graded 
by that faculty . The assignment might also become part of  a larger portfolio to be 
developed over the two to four years of  the program.
Student Teachers taking the course will be required to write a study about a child 
between 5 and 10 years old. The purpose is to follow the child’s development in 
school. Ask the Student Teachers to arrange with a school that is convenient to con-
duct a child study . The class teacher may have suggestions about which child to study . 
Student Teachers should choose a child who does not seem to be a problem to the 
teacher and whose behaviour, learning needs, and the like are typical. Permission will 
need to be obtained from the child’s parents. The study will not evaluate the child but 
document growth. The child may be a relative or someone the Student Teacher has 
not met before. If  the Student Teacher chooses a relative, they should obtain permis-
sion from the child’s teacher to visit the school and plan to observe at the school for 
40 to 60 minutes a week for eight weeks.
Once the study is completed and graded, the Student Teacher should set up a time to 
meet with the class teacher and a separate time to meet with the parent or caregiver 
to go over what they have learned. The Student Teacher should also be prepared to 
discuss this with other Student Teachers in class.

COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
25
The study should include the following headings:
•	 Introduction
•	 Subject’s first name
•	 Subject’s sex and age
•	 Setting where observation and interaction occurred
•	 Other persons present
Additional information that makes the report clear and descriptive should also be 
included. For example, Student Teachers should talk with the parents and teacher to 
find out all they can about the child. Information such as date of  birth, when she or he 
first walked, first words should be collected. The Student Teachers should then write 
a description of  the child, with the child’s interests, strengths, and needs, and include 
a physical description. The Student Teacher may also interview the child to gain 
additional information. Overall, the data collected may include:
•	 A description of  the child at school (including their friends, interactions with   
 peers and teacher, samples of  schoolwork, etc.).
•	 A description of  the child’s physical, cognitive, emotional, artistic, and self-help  
 skills, as observed. 
•	 Feedback from the child’s caregivers about their perceptions regarding the   
 child’s physical, cognitive, and emotional skills. 
During the semester, Student Teachers should collect information about the child by 
observing and taking notes. As they take notes, they should write down what they 
actually see, not opinion. For example, one might write, ‘Nida has a frown on her 
face and there are tears in her eyes. She hits the table with her fist’. This would let the 
reader see what the Student Teacher observed. If  instead the Student Teacher wrote 
‘Nida is angry’, the Student Teacher would be interpreting what they saw , but the 
reader would not be sure exactly what the Student Teacher actually witnessed. 
Student Teachers should try to observe the child during each of  the primary school 
subjects (e.g. science, mathematics, reading/language, arts, and calligraphy), at play , and 
at lunch. They should then write a brief  summary of  each observation focusing on what 
they observed. In a separate paragraph, the Student Teacher should describe how the 
observation connects to what they are learning about child development in class. 
The Student Teachers’ reports should include:
•	 A narrative summarizing their observations and what they have learned.
•	 An analysis of  how their observations link to the concepts taught in this course.
•	 Field notes as an appendix to the document. These will include, for example,  
 notes from interviews, questionnaires they may have devised, and notes  
 from observations.
The report may also include suggested recommendations for the class teacher. 
Depending on the context, these may or may not be shared by the Student Teacher 
with the class teacher.

26
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
 } Sample assignment 3: Group project and presentation
At the beginning of  the semester, Student Teachers will choose one unit for a group 
project to present to their classmates. Topics will include pre-primary education, 
primary education, adolescence, special-needs education, and inclusive education. 
Each group will write a letter of  advice to future teachers, making recommendations 
on how to best support child development and learning for each of  the topics. Letters 
should include at least 10 suggestions for practice and give justifications based on 
theory , cases, and methods studied in class. In other words, Student Teachers will 
write and support what teachers can do in a classroom to foster positive development 
and why . At the end of  each unit, the group assigned will prepare a presentation of  
their ideas in the letter to the class.
Assessments
Multiple forms of  assessment will be used in the course. Many of  these may be new 
to Student Teachers. By using multiple forms of  assessment, the Instructor will have 
many windows into the knowledge, skills, and dispositions of  Student Teachers. 
These assessments are in addition to college and university examinations. They will 
provide a good model for Student Teachers of  how to assess student knowledge, 
skills, and dispositions. In general, you will find suggestions for assessment included 
with each unit.
Plan to collect information about Student Teacher progress to help adjust your teaching 
and to provide feedback to Student Teachers. This could include activities such as:
•	 Short quiz.
•	 Minute paper. Ask Student Teachers to take one minute to write a response to   
 what they are learning in class.
•	 Observing and recording. Keep a log in a small notebook. Notice Student 
Teacher involvement in the activity that is underway . Make note of  their 
engagement. From time to time, you may wish to look at the log and note who 
is not mentioned. Make a point to notice who does not contribute to small 
groups, who dominates, and the like. Write down questions you hear Student 
Teachers ask, facial expressions, body positions, and gestures. Consider what 
your notes tell you about how Student Teachers relate to the topic at hand. 
Your log should help you think about the class holistically and pinpoint issues 
that may need more attention or those that require additional support for a 
particular Student Teacher. Your notes also help you to judge whether you need 
to reframe the activity , clarify explanation, and the like. 
•	 Journaling. Have Student Teachers keep a course journal. Following each 
session, have them record reactions to the session, what they are learning about 
themselves, and what they are learning about teaching. This can be an effective 
tool for metacognitive development.
 For the journal to be effective as a learning tool, you need to periodically look at 
them and provide comments. (There is research on journaling that shows that 
when instructors fail to comment on dialogue journals, students write less and 
less in their journals.) You might check a few journals each day so that everyone 
gets feedback once over a two-week period.

COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
27
 Another strategy is for Student Teachers to share their journals and make 
these the subject of  discussions about their own learning strategies and styles. 
This further helps develop their metacognitive skills and emphasis on collab-
orative community . You can also keep your own journal about yourself  as 
an Instructor, your reactions to a session, and similar topics and share it with 
Student Teachers in an exchange.
•	 Reading log. Readings will be drawn from a variety of  sources. Student 
Teachers are expected to develop a list of  assigned readings with notes about 
each. These notes, or annotations, should be about a paragraph in length. 
•	 Portfolios. There is no single standard formula for a course portfolio, but  
portfolios can spotlight student learning and record a process of  scholarly 
inquiry of  approaches into a particular subject. Course portfolios serve several 
functions: they serve as an aid to memory (‘what worked, what didn’t?’), they 
help in investigating student learning (‘are they learning what I am teaching?’), 
and they are available to others for discussion, feedback, and formal review . A 
course portfolio is a collection of  work by Student Teachers that ‘tells the story’ 
and provides evidence of  learning and development during the course. The 
portfolio for the Child Development course might include: 
¡¡ Extracts from the journal 
¡¡ Samples of  work from the course, including all assignments and reflections  
 as well as a selection of  class work
¡¡ Photographs
¡¡ Peer observations
¡¡ Project work
 Student Teachers should decide what to include in their portfolio and create a 
table of  contents. Making decisions about what to include is part of  the process 
of  preparing a portfolio, and Student Teachers should be encouraged to think 
about what to include to best reflect their learning and development during the 
course. Remind them, though, that an ideal portfolio is brief  and complete.
Summative assessment is important, too. In addition to the tests that are given by 
the college or university , you will want to have your own summative assessment. For 
example, if  you assign the child study or the group project described above (in the sec-
tion ‘Sample Assignments’), the completed product will make an excellent summative 
evaluation, offering you a window on to how well the Student Teachers have learned. 
Combined with formative assessments and journal reviews, a summative assessment 
will contribute to an overall picture of  each trainee teacher’s progress.

 UNIT     1  INTRODUCTION TO
 CHILD DEVELOPMENT

COURSE GUIDE:  Child Development
29
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Unit overview 
Unit 1 gives an overview of  the course and the key models, theorists, and debates 
in child development. Development is seen as a holistic process. Faculty Resources 
includes assignments and readings for the unit.
Week # T opics/themes
1
Overview of  growth and development 
Psychosocial models
Behaviourism and socio-cultural models 
2
Cognitive models
Factors that affect the child: Key issues and controversies 
Approaches to classroom development
Learning outcomes 
 l describe major theories and big themes about how children develop
 l reflect on their conceptions about child growth and development
 l compare and contrast views about the effect of  nature and nurture on  
 child development
 l identify factors that influence child development.
Essential questions
•	 How much do children determine their own behaviour? How much does   
 society determine a child’s behaviour? 
•	 What does it mean for development to be normal?
•	 What happens to children who are not normal when we talk about  
 normal development?
Enduring understandings
•	 Child development is not a static field. The theories it involves and the best   
 practices that grow out of  those theories are evolving and remain widely debated.
•	 Theories represent different perspectives on children. This is expected given the  
 great variety in the way children develop.
•	 Many different people have many different, yet valid, theories on how   
 children develop.
30
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Additional resources
Books
Laura E. Berk, Child Development, 2nd ed. (Needham Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon, 
1991).
Alison Lee, Childminder’s Guide to Child Development (New York: Continuum, 2008).
J. Santrock and S. Yussen, Child Development: An Introduction, 13th ed. (New York: 
McGraw Hill, 2010).
Web resources 
Child-development-guide.com. ‘Child Development Theories and Major 
Contributors’.
 Ø www .child-development-guide.com/child-development-theories.html
Cognitive and Language Development. A comparison of  Piaget and Vygotsky .
 Ø www .psyc.bbk.ac.uk/people/academic/thomas_m/MRCPsych_thomas_cog-
dev_140305.pdf  
‘Erik H: Erikson: A Life’s Work’ (video).
 Ø http://www .youtube.com/watch?v=mtlKXofxT-4 
Erikson’s stages. (PowerPoint presentation of  all eight stages; you may wish to use 
through the slide for 15–18 years):
 Ø http://www .drchrustowski.com/DevelopmentalImplicationsofLearning.pdf  
PowerPoint presentation with a detailed presentation of  Piaget’s theory and critique:
 Ø www .virtualpsychology .co.uk/powerpoint/PiagetsCognitiveDevelopment.ppt
Studies in Social and Moral Development and Education. ‘Moral Development and 
Moral Education: An Overview’. Theories of  moral development (including Kohlberg).
 Ø http://tigger.uic.edu/~lnucci/MoralEd/overview .html
Noam Chomsky’s nativist approach to language development.
 Ø http://www .chomsky .info
An overview of  ‘Chomsky’s Stages of  Language Development’ is available at: 
 Ø http://www .ehow .com/info_7864707_chomskys-stages-language-development.
html#ixzz1PowsC2xB
Read ‘Carl Rogers, Core Conditions, and Education’ about Carl Rogers’ holistic theory 
of  personality and its implications for education at:
 Ø http://www .infed.org/thinkers/et-rogers.htm
COURSE GUIDE:  Child Development
31
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Resources for this unit in Faculty Resources
Student T eacher readings
‘Erik Erikson’s Theory of  Child Development’
‘Behaviourism and Social Learning Theory’
‘Socio-Cultural Theory: Lev Vygotsky’
‘Cognitive Theories’
‘Piaget: Changing Ideas about Children’s Learning’
‘Key Issues and Controversies: Three Big Debates’
Faculty resources
‘Comparing Examples of  Developmental Theory: Table’
Student T eacher activities
‘Identifying Erickson’s Stages of  Child Development’ 
‘Review: Comparing Examples of  Developmental Theory: Table’
 
Unit 1: Session planning guide
Week 1, session 1: Overview of growth and development
Notes for the Instructor 
Many of  the sessions require readings from Faculty Resources or assignments to be 
completed prior to the session. 
Student Teachers who are not used to preparing before class discussion on a topic will 
need to be socialized into making preparation in advance. If  a reading or assignment 
is required for a session, it will be listed at the beginning of  the session option for 
which it is required. Look ahead to see if  an assignment needs to be made or if  you 
want to assign alternative readings. 
Three options are provided for this session. Faculty who are comfortable with learn-
er-centred active learning may want to try Option 3. Option 3 is also a good choice for 
assessing and building on Student Teachers’ prior knowledge.
Option 1
Introduction to the course (15–20 minutes) 
Give a brief  overview of  the importance of  child development for teachers.
Brainstorming (5 minutes)
Exploring conceptions of  child development and growth: Ask the following questions 
and give Student Teachers a moment to write down the first ideas that come to mind. 
32
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
There are no right or wrong answers.
•	 How do you think children grow and develop? 
•	 What is the difference between growth and development?
•	 What part does a child’s heredity play in his or her growth and development?
•	 What part does family , culture, and environment (e.g. city or country) play on a  
 child’s growth and development?
Pair-share (5–10 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to talk to the person next to them or on either side about their 
lists and select a few responses to each question.
Whole group discussion (20 minutes) 
Take as many ideas from Student Teachers as time permits for each question. (Ideas may 
be noted on chart paper by the Student Teachers or simply discussed and summarized on 
the board. Note ideas that are repeated or on which there is consensus across the class.)
Point out that during the semester, they will encounter different answers to these 
same questions. 
Review of Syllabus (10 minutes) 
Hand out copies of  the Syllabus. Give Student Teachers an opportunity to look it over 
and then highlight the various sections.
Point out that the approach to teaching and learning that will be used in this course 
may be very different than their previous educational experiences. Some of  them 
may find it uncomfortable at first. Encourage them to give it time, try to enter into 
activities, and do their best.
Option 2
Introduction (10–15 minutes) 
Give a brief  overview of  the importance of  child development for teachers.
Self-reflection on development (10–15 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to complete the following list, working individually . Ask them to 
answer the questions quickly and to the best of  their recollection. Tell them that answers 
will be used for discussion and not to worry about how accurate they are. Student Teachers 
should write down what they remember, not an exact description. (Some Student Teachers 
will not remember; they may want to think about a younger sibling or a relative.)
•	 What does your family tell you about your infancy? (For example, what was   
 your appearance, interaction, temperament, and growth?)
•	 As a preschooler, what were you like? (For example, what were your food pref 
erences, when did you learn to walk and talk, what was your appearance, 
how did you interact with others, what were your first words, what was your 
temperament and growth?)
COURSE GUIDE:  Child Development
33
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
•	 What were you like at school age? (For example, what was your level of  
achievement, did you like school, who were your friends, what were your food 
preferences and language, what did you like to play , when did you learn to read, 
and when did you learn to write?)
Small group share (15 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to share in groups of  three to five people. 
Ask them to notice what is alike and what is different in their experiences.
Whole group discussion (15 minutes)
Elicit ideas from a few of  the groups on the following question: ‘What do you think 
this activity can tell you about what to expect from a course on child development?’
Review of Syllabus (10 minutes)
Hand out copies of  the Syllabus. Give Student Teachers an opportunity to look it 
over and then highlight the various sections. Point out that the approach to teaching 
and learning that will be used in this course may be very different than their previous 
educational experiences. 
Option 3
Introduction (5 minutes) 
Offer a brief  introduction and welcome to the course.
Brainstorm (20 minutes) 
Form groups of  four to five Student Teachers.
Next, ask the class members to brainstorm answers to the following questions, based 
on what they already know from their own experiences: 
•	 What are children like during: preschool, primary school, middle school, and  
 as adolescents? 
•	 What kinds of  activities appeal to children during these periods? Which topics  
 would you choose for each age group to learn at school? 
Remind Student Teachers that there are no right or wrong answers, and to share 
their opinions.
Ask each group to create columns on chart paper (per the diagram below) to record 
their ideas.
Remind Student Teachers to not spend time making a decorative chart. They should 
list headings and quickly put down their ideas, filling in as much information as 
possible in the given time. 
Note: New undergraduate students often spend energy on creating the poster rather 
than the ideas. Insist that they focus on substance, not form. Discourage drawing a 
table grid or borders around the page.
34
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Preschool
Younger 
primary 
school
Older primary 
school/middle 
school
Adolescents
What are children 
like during this 
period?
What kinds of 
activities appeal 
to children during 
this period?
Which topics 
would you suggest 
for children to 
learn about during 
this period?
Gallery walk (10 minutes) 
Have groups post their work. Ask Student Teachers to walk around and look at what 
others have done. Do not comment on their choices.
Mini-lecture and summary (10 minutes)
Point out that based on our own common sense and experience, we know a lot about 
how children learn and grow . We have ideas about what they like to do and what they 
need to know . Use this activity to focus remarks on why the study of  child develop-
ment can benefit teachers.
COURSE GUIDE:  Child Development
35
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Week 1, session 2: Psychosocial models
The readings for this session (listed below) are available in Faculty Resources. You may 
want to assign them prior to the session or as a follow-up.
•	 ‘Erik Erikson’s Theory of  Child Development’
•	 ‘Identifying Erikson’s Stages of  Child Development’
Option 1
Note: This option is also available as a fully developed lesson plan at the end of  Unit 1.
Review (5–10 minutes)
Point out that we can learn a great deal about child growth and development by 
thinking about our own childhoods.
Ask questions to stimulate thinking. Ask Student Teachers to write down the first 
thought that comes to mind:
•	 What are one or two major events that occurred in your life as a child? or 
•	 What major events are happening in the lives of  your own children?
•	 Did the way you handled those experiences (as a child or parent) affect you (or  
 your children) in positive or negative ways?
Lecture (20–30 minutes)
Review the stages of  Erikson’s psychosocial development model.
For notes on making lectures more meaningful for Student Teachers, see Option 
Details at the end of  Unit 1.
Pair work (15 minutes)  
Ask Student Teachers to complete the ‘Identifying Erikson’s Stages of  Child 
Development’ handout in pairs. Go over the answers with the class.
Reflection and discussion (10 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers if  they agree with the linear structure of  Erikson’s model. 
Ask Student Teachers if  children move on to other stages of  development if  they have 
not resolved previous stages.
Point out that Erikson did not believe so, but people have different opinions.
36
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Option 2
Review (5 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to reflect and write down ideas on the question: ‘What are some 
major social and psychological issues facing Pakistani children of  different ages today?’ 
Lecture (30 minutes) 
Elicit several ideas from the review and write them on the board or chart paper. Ask 
Student Teachers to keep their lists as they will refer to them at the end of  the period.
Review the stages of  Erikson’s psychosocial development model, referring to the list, 
if  possible.
Reflection (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to identify incidents in their own lives that demonstrate one or 
more of  the first five developmental stages according to Erikson. 
Ask how their actions affected their ability to resolve the ‘crisis’ of  that stage, and to 
share briefly with a partner.
Group discussion (15 minutes) 
Break the class into groups of  four or five and discuss the points they wrote down at the 
beginning of  class about issues facing Pakistani children. Ask the following questions:
•	 How would Erikson classify these problems into a stage/struggle? 
•	 What are some suggestions for practices based on the model that could address  
 these issues for Pakistani youth?
Week 1, session 3: Behaviourism and socio-cultural models
Readings for this session (listed below) are available in Faculty Resources. You may want 
to assign them prior to the session or as a follow-up.
•	 ‘Behaviourism and Social Learning Theory’
•	 ‘Socio-Cultural Theory: Lev Vygotsky’
Option 1
Review (5 minutes) 
Lead participants to review the main concepts of  the psychosocial perspective from 
the previous session.
Lecture (30 minutes) 
Review the main ideas of  behaviourism, social learning theory , and socio-cultural 
theory and the different theorists associated with these ideas.
COURSE GUIDE:  Child Development
37
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Discussion (10 minutes)
Ask the following questions:
•	 How do these theorists’ ideas differ from the psychosocial theorists? 
•	 What criticisms do you have of  the theories?
Group work (15 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to think of  an example of  how teachers or other children try to 
modify children’s behaviour using reinforcement or punishment. 
Ask group members to share observations and anecdotes, and then choose one 
example to share with the whole class.
Take a few minutes for whole-class sharing.
Option 2
Review (5 minutes) 
Lead participants to review the main concepts of  the psychosocial perspective from 
the previous session. 
Group work (20 minutes) 
Divide participants in groups of  four to five to review the readings. Assign a theorist 
(Watson, Skinner, Bandura, or Vygotsky) to each group and ask them to prepare to 
present the main ideas of  the theorist assigned to them. Depending on the number of  
Student Teachers, there may be more than one group per theorist.
Ask participants to prepare to present the main idea of  the theorist, criticisms, and an 
example of  how a teacher would use the theory in the classroom.
Presentations (20 minutes) 
Each group has four to five minutes to present a theorist’s main ideas to the class 
(depending on the number of  groups). If  there is more than one group for a theorist, 
notice any differences in interpretation.
Lecture (15 minutes) 
Using the main ideas from each group presentation, correct understanding and 
highlight how the perspectives of  theorists differ. Note that teachers usually use ideas 
from several theories.
Looking ahead
Option 2 in the next session (Session 4) requires some preparation. Ask Student 
Teachers to bring articles, pictures, or titles from newspapers or magazines that are 
related to children in some way . They may bring in more than one. The Instructor 
should bring additional material (sufficient to conduct a small group activity). 
38
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 2, session 4: Cognitive models
Reading for this session is available in Faculty Resources. You may want to assign them 
prior to the session or as a follow-up.
•	 Cognitive Theories
•	 Piaget: Changing Ideas about Children’s Learning
Option 1
Group work (jigsaw) (20 minutes) 
Assign Student Teachers to small groups and ask them to discuss the reading. Assign 
half  the group to consider Piaget and half  to consider Bruner. 
Ask the following question: ‘How is Piaget’s (or Bruner’s) cognitive model of  develop-
ment different from psychosocial, behaviourist, and socio-cultural models?’ 
Ask the groups who discussed Piaget to join a group that discussed Bruner. Have the 
combined groups each take five minutes to explain their discussion to each other.
Lecture (20–30 minutes) 
Cover the key ideas of  Piaget’s theory of  cognitive development, present the four 
stages of  cognitive development, and discuss the implications for teaching practice. 
(Alternatively , use a PowerPoint presentation; one is listed in references for this unit.)
Contrast these with Bruner’s ideas about modes of  representation. 
Think, pair, share (10 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to work with a partner and think of  one to three short class-
room activities that reflect cognitive theory’s implications for teaching practice. 
After working in pairs, call on several partners to share one activity idea with the class 
and explain how it reflects Piaget’s or Bruner’s cognitive theory . 
Option 2
The lesson plan for this option is at the end of  Unit 1.
Assignment 
At the end of  Session 3, ask Student Teachers to bring an article, picture, or title from 
newspapers or magazines that is related to children in some way . They may bring in 
more than one. The Instructor should bring additional material (sufficient to conduct 
a small group activity). 
COURSE GUIDE:  Child Development
39
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Review (5 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to quickly write down the names of  the theories studied in the 
course so far in their order of  preference. Ask a few Student Teachers to share their 
first choice and why .
Classifying articles and pictures (20–30 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to meet in groups. 
Each group will spread their articles and pictures on a table or desks and look at them. 
Ask them if  they can find any categories that they could use to group the articles and 
pictures. Accept their groupings. 
Provide chart paper, markers, and paste or tape and have them mount the materials 
on chart paper and label their categories. 
Ask groups to post them in the room. (Move around the room to observe during the 
activity . Notice how groups make their decisions.) 
Give Student Teachers a few minutes at the end to walk around the room and look at vari-
ous ways people grouped pictures and articles and answer questions asked by their peers.
Lecture (30 minutes) 
Talk about what you noticed as people developed groups. Point out that Bruner talks 
about how people categorize things. His theory describes categories of  thinking: con-
crete, semi-concrete, and abstract. Compare Bruner’s idea of  categorization to Piaget’s 
idea about how the mind creates categories or schema. You may want to show the 
PowerPoint presentation to describe Piaget’s theory in more detail available at: 
 Ø www .virtualpsychology .co.uk/powerpoint/PiagetsCognitiveDevelopment.ppt
Ask Student Teachers if  they have changed their preference for theories they have 
studied after the session on cognitive theory . Ask them to explain why or why not to 
the class, taking as many opinions as time permits.
40
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 2, session 5: Factors that affect the child—Key 
issues and controversies
The reading for this session is available in Faculty Resources: ‘Key Issues and 
Controversies: Three Big Debates’. You will also need the handout from Faculty 
Resources ‘Comparing Examples of  Developmental Theory’.
Option 1
Review (15 minutes) 
This is an activity that will help Student Teachers review the unit and assess how well 
they are learning.
Before class, write the following on strips of  paper, mix them up, and place randomly on tables:
These are the names of  major theories studied, names of  theorists studied, and major 
concepts proposed by each theorist.
Also before class, create the following headings across a wall or on a whiteboard:
Theorist Birth:  Preschool:  Younger Older children:  Adolescence: 
and 18 months– 2– 4 years children:  7–12 years 13–19 years
theory 2 years 4–6 years
Ask Student Teachers to walk around the room and ask them to group theory , theo-
rist, and terms in the right categories. Everyone can consult and be involved. Provide 
tape to Student Teachers to post their groupings on the wall or a chalk/whiteboard. 
Do not correct them but allow Student Teachers to look at what they are doing and 
make corrections. 
After 10 minutes, ask everyone to stop. Hand out ‘Comparing Examples of  Developmental 
Theory’ from Faculty Resources. Give them five minutes to try to complete the groupings.
Note: This activity could be extended for the whole session with more discussion 
about choices and time for critique of  decisions and correction of  misconceptions.
Erikson Psy chosocial theory  Industr y vs. inferiority
Watson B ehaviourist theory Lear ning identity vs. identity diffusion
Skinner Socio-cultur al theory  Z one of proximal development
Bandura Co gnitive theory  Sensori-motor
Vygotsky T rust vs. mistrust  Pr eoperational thinking
Piaget A utonomy vs. shame and doubt  C oncrete operations
Bruner Lear ning initiative vs. guilt  F ormal operations
  Enacti ve representation
  Iconic r epresentation
  Abstr act representation
COURSE GUIDE:  Child Development
41
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Individual activity (10 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to take out a piece of  paper and write down their favourite 
food, favourite school subject, the age they stopped growing taller, a special talent or 
skill, and the way they prefer to spend time (with friends or family). 
Active lecture (20 minutes) 
Pose the question: ‘Where do our preferences, characteristics, growth patterns, and 
talents come from?’
Elicit the opinion of  Student Teachers:
•	 How many people in the class think that who we are is basically inherited from  
 our parents? (Ask for a show of  hands.)
•	 How many people think we are basically shaped by our environment, by family  
 and culture? (Ask for a show of  hands.)
Talk about how the issue of  heredity and environment has led to three interrelated 
debates: nature versus nurture, universality versus context specific, and continuity 
versus discontinuity . Provide an explanation for each. 
Ask Student Teachers to follow up by reading ‘Key Issues and Controversies: Three 
Big Debates’ in Faculty Resources for homework.
Option 2
Review (15 minutes)
As above, in Option 1.
Lecture (25 minutes) 
See Faculty Resources, ‘Key Issues and Controversies: Three Big Debates’. Give an 
overview of  the three debates: nature versus nurture, continuity versus discontinuity , 
and universality versus context specific.
Pair activity (10 minutes) 
Student Teachers break into pairs. Ask them to come up with an example of  a situa-
tion for each debate (nature versus nurture, continuity versus discontinuity , universali-
ty versus context specific).
Discussion (10 minutes) 
Ask the class to come together and have groups share their answers.
42
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 2, session 6: Approaches to classroom development
Option 1
Group discussion (5 minutes) 
Ask the Student Teachers to think back to their experiences in the classroom as 
children. Take an informal classroom survey of  when they learned to read. Is there 
variation? What are some possible explanations for the variation?
Lecture (20 minutes) 
Discuss the concept of  diversity of  developmental abilities in classrooms and how 
major instructional approaches respond to that diversity . 
At the end of  the lecture, ask Student Teachers to share with a partner one thing 
they learned. 
Unit review (10 minutes) 
Review the major concepts and themes of  the unit.
Concept web poster activity (20 minutes) 
Student Teachers consider the models discussed in the lecture. Ask Student Teachers 
to think about whether there are any connections that can be made to theorists and 
the major concepts discussed. 
Ask Student Teachers to make a web of  concepts and relationships in groups on a 
poster. These are shared with the class.
3-2-1 (5 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to write down three things they have learned, two that they would 
like to know more about, and one idea or skill they have mastered from the unit.
Option 2
Review (5 minutes) 
Lead a review of  the major debates in child development.
Think, pair, share (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to consider their strengths as learners. Ask them to share one of  
these strengths with a partner. Each partner reports the strengths of  the other to the class. 
Discuss: ‘ Are there differences within the class or does everyone have the same strength?’ 
Lecture (20 minutes) 
Discuss the concept of  diversity of  developmental abilities in classrooms and how 
major instructional approaches respond to that diversity . At the end of  the lecture, ask 
Student Teachers to share one thing they learned with a partner.
COURSE GUIDE:  Child Development
43
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Self-reflection (5 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers, ‘Which models do you recognize? Which are foreign to you? 
Which model is typical of  schools in Pakistan?’
Unit review (15 minutes) 
Review the major theorists, themes, and concepts from the course.
Miniature essay (5 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to write about one concept covered in the course that they are 
interested in learning more about. Ask them to explain how they intend to do so.
Sample lesson plans
Week 1, session 2, Option 1: Psychosocial models
Learning outcomes 
Student Teachers will be able to:
 l describe Erikson’s psychosocial theory and identify practical classroom applications
 l reflect on their conceptions of  child growth and development.
Prerequisite 
Student Teachers will have read ‘Erik Erikson’s Theory of  Child Development’ (in 
Faculty Resources).
Materials
One of  the following:
•	 YouTube video on Erikson at: http://www .youtube.com/watch?v=mtlKXofxT-4
•	 PowerPoint presentation ‘Factors that Influence Youth Culture’ at:  
 myclass.peelschools.org. (Use through the slide on page 18.) Search  
 F actors that Influence Youth Culture + myclass.peelschools.org to  
 do wnload the PowerPoint.
Learning experiences and activities
Review session 1 (10 minutes) 
Show the following quotation on an overhead or have it written on the chalk/whiteboard:
We are studying [children] from every possible biological and cultural angle, putting 
the results together for one common goal: that tomorrow’s children may have life 
more abundantly , because we are learning from today’s children.1 
1 W. M. Krogman, 1953 Science, p.3. 
(http://www.sciencemag.org/con-
tent/117/3041/local/ed-board.pdf)
44
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Ask Student Teachers to think about how the quotation applies to teachers. Elicit two 
to three opinions. (There is no right answer, but the quotation is thought-provoking.)
Point out that they can learn a great deal about the child growth and development 
theories they will be learning about by thinking about their own childhoods or 
observing the children in their families.
Ask questions to stimulate thinking:
•	 What are one or two major events that occurred in your life as a child, or what  
 major events are happening in the lives of  your own children?
•	 Did the way you handled those experiences (as a child or parent) affect you in  
 positive or negative ways?
Ask Student Teachers to keep their answers to these questions in mind as you talk 
about child development from the psychosocial perspective of  Erik Erikson.
Active lecture (20–30 minutes)
Review the stages of  Erikson’s psychosocial development model. (This may be done 
by viewing the video or PowerPoint presentation about Erikson; two resources are 
listed above.)
Erikson’s developmental stages from birth to adolescence:
1) Trust vs. mistrust (0–1 year old)
2) Autonomy vs. shame/doubt (2–4 years old)
3) Learning initiative vs. guilt (4–5 years old)
4) Industry vs. inferiority (5–12 years old)
5) Learning identity vs. identity diffusion (13–19 years old)
Answer questions.
Ask if  they can recall the stages of  play that Erikson identifies and give an example. 
•	 Autocosmic play (self-play) 
•	 Microcosmic play (small toys and things) 
•	 Macrocosmic play (social) 
Pair work (15 minutes)
Student Teachers complete the ‘Identifying Erikson’s Stages of  Child Development’ 
handout in pairs. Give Student Teachers a few minutes to work together, then go over 
answers with the class.
COURSE GUIDE:  Child Development
45
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Reflection and discussion (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers if  they agree with the linear structure of  Erikson’s model. 
Ask: ‘Can children move on to other stages of  development if  they have not resolved 
previous stages?’
Point out that Erikson doesn’t think so, but people have different opinions.
Summarize (1 minute)
Briefly summarize by stating that in this session we have thought about Erik Erikson’s 
psychosocial theory of  development. In the next session we will look at behaviourist 
and socio-cultural theories.
Assessment 
Use observation for ongoing (formative) assessment of  this lesson. Notice who 
contributes to class discussion and who over-contributes. As Student Teachers engage 
in pair work, walk around the room and listen to their conversations. After class, you 
may want to make notes as part of  a record of  participation.
Week 2, session 4, Option 2: Cognitive models
Learning outcomes 
Student Teachers will be able to:
 l describe Piaget’s cognitive theory and identify practical classroom applications
 l describe Bruner’s modes of  representation and identify practical  
 classroom applications
 l reflect on their conceptions of  child growth and development. 
Prerequisite 
Student Teachers will have read ‘Cognitive Theories’ (see Faculty Resources). 
Materials 
•	 Newspaper clippings, pictures from magazines, titles from newspapers or   
 magazines, and advertisements that depict or describe children.
•	 Detailed PowerPoint presentation of  Piaget’s theory and critique: 
 Ø www .virtualpsychology .co.uk/powerpoint/PiagetsCognitiveDevelopment.ppt
At the end of  Session 3, assign Student Teachers to bring in pictures, short newspa-
per articles, titles from newspapers of  magazines, or advertisements that depict or 
describe children.
46
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Learning experiences and activities
Review session 3 (5 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to quickly write down the names of  the theories they have 
studied in the course so far in their order of  preference. Ask a few Student Teachers to 
share their first choice and why (e.g. psychosocial theory , behaviourist, socio-cultural 
models, or they may name theorists Erikson, Skinner, Watson, Bandura, or Vygotsky).
Classifying articles/pictures (20 minutes) 
Have Student Teachers meet in groups of  four to five members each. Each group will 
spread articles and pictures they have brought on a table or desks and look at them carefully .
Ask them to group the articles and pictures into at least three groups or categories. 
They must be able to give their categories a name and explain why they have grouped 
them as they have.
Move around the room to observe during the activity . Notice how groups are making 
their decisions. Accept their groupings. 
Provide chart paper, markers, paste, or tape and have them mount the materials on 
chart paper and label their categories. Have groups post their charts in the room. 
Gallery walk (5 minutes) 
Ask one member of  each group to stand by their poster and be prepared to explain 
categories or answer questions about it.
Direct other Student Teachers to walk around the room and look at various ways 
people grouped their pictures and articles and answer questions asked by their peers.
Active lecture (30 minutes) 
Talk about what you noticed as people developed groups of  things. Point out that 
they were using a concept formation strategy . The activity is a reminder of  how much 
we classify in our regular lives and how there are different rationales for different 
classifications.2 Bruner talks about how people categorize things. 
His theory describes categories of  thinking, or representation: 
•	 Enactive representation (physical activity-based), or concrete thinking
•	 Iconic representation (image-based), or semi-concrete thinking 
•	 Symbolic representation (language-based), or abstract thinking
2 Read about using concept formation. 
Saskatoon Public Schools, ‘Instructional 
Strategies Online’. http://olc.spsd.sk.ca/
de/pd/instr/strats/formation/index.html
COURSE GUIDE:  Child Development
47
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Compare Bruner’s idea of  categorization to Piaget’s idea about how the mind cre-
ates categories, or schema. Key concepts and principles for Piaget’s theory of  child 
development:
•	 Children are active and motivated learners. They are naturally curious about   
 the world around them.
•	 Children organize what they learn from their experiences and construct a view 
of  how the world operates by observations. The things that children learn 
are organized in schema, or groups of  similar thoughts. Later, these schemas 
become part of  larger mental processes, or operations. 
•	 Children adapt to their environment through assimilation and accommodation. 
Assimilation describes when people deal with a new event in a way that is 
consistent with an existing scheme. When new events or objects are unfamiliar, 
people use accommodation, meaning they modify or create a new scheme. 
•	 Interaction with the physical environment and with other people is critical for  
 cognitive development.
•	 Children think in qualitatively different ways at different age levels or stages.
You may want to show the PowerPoint presentation to describe Piaget’s theory in 
more detail (see Materials, or refer to: www .virtualpsychology .co.uk/powerpoint/
PiagetsCognitiveDevelopment.ppt rather than presenting this in lecture form).
Summarize (5 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers if  they have changed their preference for theories they have 
studied after the day’s session on cognitive theory . Have them explain why or why not 
to the class, taking as many opinions as time permits.
Briefly summarize by reminding them that in this session they have thought about the 
cognitive theories of  Jean Piaget and Jerome Bruner. In the next session they will think 
about three big debates in child development.
Assign reading ‘Key Issues and Controversies: Three Big Debates’, in Faculty Resources.
Assessment 
Use observation for continuous (formative) assessment of  this lesson. Notice how 
Student Teachers participate in cooperative groups. After class, you may want to 
make notes about participation.
 UNIT     2  EARLY CHILDHOOD
 DEVELOPMENT
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
49
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Overview 
This unit looks at the first three stages of  child development: infant, toddler, and 
preschool. It focuses on knowledge essential for primary and middle school teachers 
about how children grow and how this knowledge can inform intelligent practice in 
children’s later years.
Week # T opics/themes
3
Unit introduction: Infant development 
The three domains of  toddler development
Developmentally appropriate practices for toddlers
4
The three domains of  preschool child development
Developmentally appropriate practices for preschool 
child development
Unit review
Learning outcomes 
 l identify perspectives on development for infant, toddler, and preschooler
 l identify major transition points in pre-primary development
 l associate developmental stages with daily interactions children have with   
 other children
 l design an age-appropriate stimulus to initiate or enhance development in a child
 l defend the importance of  balanced or wholesome development of  a child
 l justify knowledge of  early childhood development in planning programs for   
 older children
 l identify the difference in application of  ages and stage theory as descriptive versus   
 prescriptive of  what a child can and should do.
Essential questions
•	 How are the major developmental stages differentiated?
•	 What are indicators at each developmental stage? 
•	 How does context influence the development of  very young children?
•	 What are the roles of  parents, caregivers, and peers in the lives of  a developing child?
•	 How might over-reliance on developmental stage theory limit possibilities  
 for children?
50
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Enduring understandings
•	 Strong development in the earliest years of  a child’s life is critical for future   
 stages of  development.
•	 Intensive care from family members and caregivers is crucial to balanced   
 development.
•	 Love, care, and affection enhance pre-primary child development.
•	 Young children need to feel that they belong and that their ideas and needs are  
 taken seriously .
•	 Every child is both unique from and similar to all other children.
Additional resources 
Books
S. Bredekamp and C. Copple (eds.), Developmentally Appropriate Practice in Early 
Childhood Programs Serving Children from Birth through Age 8 (Washington, DC: National 
Association for the Education of  Young Children, 1999) 
 Ø http://www .naeyc.org/files/naeyc/file/positions/position%20statement%20Web.pdf
Web resources
Martha A. Adler and Mary Trepainer-Street, ‘College Students’ Beliefs about Preschoolers’ 
Literacy Development: Results from a National Survey of  Jumpstart’, Early Childhood 
Research and Practice, 9 (2007). 
 Ø http://ecrp.uiuc.edu/v9n2/adler.html
ECD Programme (2010). Nurture: Pakistan’s Pioneer Publication on Early Childhood Development. 
 Ø http://www .ecdpak.com/nurture/about_nurture.html
Early Childhood Development (ECD) Pakistan website.
 Ø http://www .ecdpak.com
J. McVicker Hunt, ‘The Effect of  Variations in Quality and Type of  Early Child Care on 
Development’, New Directions for Child Development, 32 (1986), 31–48.
 Ø http://psycnet.apa.org/psycinfo/1988-04014-001
Christopher J. Lonigan, ‘Comment on Marcon (ERCP , Vol. 4, No. 1, Spring 2002): Moving 
Up the Grades: Relationship between Preschool Models’, Early Childhood Research and 
Practice, 5 (2003). 
 Ø http://ecrp.uiuc.edu/v5n1/lonigan.html 
Rebecca A. Marcon, ‘Moving up the Grades: Relationship between Preschool Model and 
Later School Success’, Early Childhood Research and Practice, 4 (2002).
 Ø http://ecrp.uiuc.edu/v4n1/marcon.html
M. Shahbodaghi, et al., ‘A Comparative Study on Language Features and Educational 
Situation of  Orphan versus Non Orphan Children with 7 Years Old’, Tehran University of  
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
51
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Medical Sciences, 2007, viewed on March 18 2013.
 Ø http://journals.tums.ac.ir/abs.aspx?org_id=59&culture_var=en&journal_
id=23&issue_id=412&manuscript_id=3883&segment=fa  Permanent Link: http://
journals.tums.ac.ir/abs/3883
Resources for this unit in Faculty Resources
Student T eacher readings
‘Ready to Learn or Already Learning?’
‘The Importance of  Childhood Health and Care’
Faculty resources
‘Fact Sheet on Toddler Development’ 
‘Fact Sheet on Preschool Child Development’ 
‘College Students’ Beliefs about Preschoolers’ Literacy Development: A Discussion’
Note: Readings for each session may be listed within the Option Details for each 
session hereafter. It is assumed that faculty will check Faculty Resources in planning so 
that assignments prior to each session can be made when appropriate.
Unit 2: Session planning guide 
Week 3, session 7: Unit introduction—Preschool  
child development
Option 1
Introduction to new unit (5 minutes)
Introduce the unit by pointing out that an understanding of  how growth takes place 
over time helps us to understand how much a child has accomplished by the time they 
get to school. A great deal has been happening in their lives; they have already devel-
oped ways of  understanding and coping with the world around them that began at 
birth. While we will look at landmarks in development, such as size and weight, this 
unit will not divide growth and development into domains (mind and body) but will 
look at the child as a whole. 
You may want to ask Student Teachers to come prepared by having read the essay 
‘Ready to Learn or Already Learning?’ in Faculty Resources. (Or it may be an assigned 
reading following the session.)
Note to Instructors: Having Student Teachers weigh and measure children is not a 
good use of  time and it will raise concerns and questions among children and parents. 
52
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Recording experiences (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to think about interactions they have had with infants and 
preschool-aged children. Ask: ‘What have you noticed? What have you heard?’ Ask 
as many Student Teachers as possible to share something. Record comments on the 
chalk/whiteboard. (There are no right answers.)
You can collect information quickly by asking two class members to be recorders. 
Have them alternate in writing comments. This will keep discussion moving.
Active lecture (30 minutes)
Give a general overview of  each developmental stage: infant, toddler, and preschool. 
Use comments that Student Teachers have contributed to illustrate key points you 
want to make. (This cannot be comprehensive in 25 minutes. Focus on key concepts.)
Writing activity (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to write the critical developmental milestones observed in each 
of  the developmental stages. 
Emphasize the need to look at the four domains of  child development: physical, 
cognitive, social, and emotional.
Option 2
Introduction to new unit (25 minutes)
Divide the class into thirds. Assign each group a developmental stage: infant, toddler, 
or preschooler. Subdivide each developmental stage group to make subgroups of  
three to five members. 
Brainstorm: Each group will think about what they have learned in Unit 1 and their 
own life experience with the age group to which they have been assigned and jot 
down key things that children can do at each age. Focus on their accomplishments.
Graphic representation: Have each group use their list to create a poster with some 
kind of  graphic representation that shows developmental characteristics of  the age 
group they’ve been assigned. 
They may not make a list but should think of  visual images such as trees, boxes, 
spirals, arrows, and symbols to show relationships between areas of  growth that 
contribute to a whole child as they understand these areas. 
They may create three-dimensional posters using scrap paper, scissors, glue, objects 
found in nature (such as twigs, leaves, or small pebbles), or other junk items. 
The idea isn’t to be ‘pretty’ but to illustrate. Discourage complicated borders, making 
ruler lines, and the like. Encourage messy but illustrative work.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
53
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Circulate among groups to observe. Keep the group members productive—one 
member should not be making the chart for the group, and all members should work 
on part of  the chart. Give a five-minute warning for finishing and clearing.
Gallery walk and discussion (15 minutes)
Ask one member from each group to remain with the group’s poster to explain it. 
Other members should examine as many posters as they can within the allotted time. 
Ask Student Teachers to discuss major developmental milestones they have noticed 
in their observations or from children in their own lives. After about five minutes, ask 
the Student Teachers to discuss whether developmental milestones matter, and why 
or why not.
Ask Student Teachers to discuss practices that they see in observations or in their own 
teaching or parenting. What practices seem to support development? What practices 
might not be helpful? 
Save graphic representations for the end of  the unit review . 
Follow-up (10 minutes) 
Invite Student Teachers to think about why you have introduced the unit with this activity . 
What do they think you were trying to accomplish? Elicit several opinions. 
You may share your answer if  you wish or ask them to continue thinking. (Two pos-
sible reasons: this is an active way of  assessing what they recall from Unit 1 and how 
they can apply it to Unit 2, and it focuses them on children’s strengths and accomplish-
ments rather than weaknesses.) 
Elicit two or three answers to the question about whether developmental milestones 
matter, and why or why not. Note if  there are differences of  opinion. Do not com-
ment except to note that the question will continue to be discussed. 
Reflection (5 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to write a one-minute paper in response to the question: ‘What 
kinds of  criteria can you use in judging teaching practices as helpful or not helpful to 
toddlers or preschool children?’ 
Ask Student Teachers to save their papers and look at them again in about four weeks 
to check if  their answers are similar.
Save the posters to revisit in the last session.
Assignment
Have Student Teachers read the essay ‘Ready to Learn or Already Learning?’ in 
Faculty Resources .
54
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 3, session 8: The three domains of toddler 
development
Option 1
Lecture (20 minutes)
Discuss the developmental changes that occur during the transition from infancy to 
the toddler stage.
Reflection (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to refer to readings provided earlier to look at Erikson’s first and 
second developmental stages, and then write down how toddlers’ relationships with 
their parents change.
Group discussion (20 minutes)
Divide the class into small groups to discuss their views on Erikson’s theories on the 
developmental crisis (hope) and struggle (autonomy vs. shame/doubt). Ask them to 
jot down their opinions on the following questions:
•	 Based on your observation and life experience, what is your opinion on the   
 capacity and limitations of  toddlers?
•	 In what ways do you agree or differ with Erikson? 
•	 How might early childhood teachers and/or parents support development at   
 this time in a child’s life? 
•	 How do Erikson’s descriptions compare with Piaget’s description of    
 preschool development?
Ambassadors (10 minutes) 
Have half  of  each group go to another group to share what they discussed. Each 
group receives about five minutes. 
Note: Using ambassadors is a useful way to get groups or individuals to exchange 
information. Two or more members move from one group to another to share and 
compare discussion. Alternatively , you may wish to ask half  the group to exchange 
with another group. This is especially useful if  you do not have ample time for a full 
class discussion.
Option 2
Note: Option 2 requires Student Teachers to read in class. If  they find reading English 
too much of  a challenge at this point in their first year, you may wish to alter the plan 
by asking them to read the fact sheet prior to class and go over the longer article with 
them rather than have them work in groups. Then have them do a text-against-text 
activity but allow at least half  the class time for their text-against-text discussion. Share 
main insights with the whole class at the end. 
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
55
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Small groups (20 minutes)
Hand out ‘Fact Sheet on Toddler Development’ from Faculty Resources. Give groups 
time to go over it and discuss the developmental changes that occur during the 
transition from infancy to the toddler stage. Point out that they will need to use the 
information in the handout. Move among the groups to answer questions or clarify .
Ask the groups to think about how the information on the ‘Fact Sheet on Toddler 
Development’ compares with their personal knowledge of  toddlers.
Role-play activity (25 minutes)
Working in pairs, Student Teachers will use the information about toddler develop-
ment to inform their role play as either the parent or babysitter of  a toddler.
The Student Teacher acting as the babysitter must think of  a list of  questions to ask 
about the needs and behaviours of  the child, and the parent must think of  a list of  
suggestions for activities or things to be aware of  for the babysitter. 
Pairs will work on their lists individually and share insights as a whole class.
Reflection (5 minutes) 
Student Teachers are encouraged to think of  suggestions they would give to parents 
of  toddlers from the educator’s point of  view about how to create a supportive, 
encouraging environment for their children at home.
Week 3, session 9: Developmentally appropriate practices 
for toddlers
Option 1
Lecture (30 minutes)
Review theories and practices that support healthy development for toddlers.
Reflection and reading (15 minutes)
Student Teachers complete brief  written reflections on the relationship between 
health and nutrition, and cognitive thinking and development. Student Teachers 
then read the handout ‘The Importance of  Childhood Health and Care’ (in Faculty 
Resources) or review it if  the article has been assigned for this session.
Class discussion (15 minutes)
Guide the class to share the written reflections and new insights that they gained from 
the reading.
Review the main points and answers questions.
56
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Option 2
Handout (10–15 minutes) 
Hand out the ‘Fact Sheet on Toddler Development’ with practices supporting healthy 
development for toddlers. Review the handout with Student Teachers.
Reading (30 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to work in groups of  three to four to read the handout ‘The 
Importance of  Childhood Health and Care’ (in Faculty Resources). Have them form 
their groups based on who is more or less comfortable reading English text. If  possi-
ble, each group should have someone who can assist entering Student Teachers who 
may not yet feel as comfortable reading at this level.
Circulate among groups. Be ready to assist if  the reading level is too challenging.
Summary , review (5 minutes)
Provide a quick summary of  the article to ensure Student Teachers understood main points.
Text-against-text (10 minutes)
Ask small groups to compare the article with the ‘Fact Sheet on Toddler Development’. 
Ask them what insights they may have when considering the two texts together.
Week 4, session 10: The three domains of preschool 
child development 
‘College Students’ Beliefs about Preschoolers’ Literacy Development: A Discussion’, 
in Faculty Resources, may be used as the basis for a mini-lecture or assigned as a reading 
prior to class.
Looking ahead
If  you choose Option 1 in this session, plan to use Option 1 in Week 4, session 11: 
Developmentally appropriate practices for preschool child development.
Option 1
Note: This option focuses on designing a field project for a group of  Student Teachers 
to observe a three-year-old child and a five-year-old child. They will have an opportu-
nity to think about observed developmental stages and the transition of  a child from 
toddler to preschool child. If  an early education centre is not nearby , they should iden-
tify family of  group members who live close by and have siblings or faculty members 
with children. Develop a permission form for parents to sign, promising classroom 
use only of  information and use of  pseudonyms.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
57
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Introduction (10 minutes)
Introduce the unit. If  the reading has been assigned, ask for several Student Teachers 
to briefly share their reflections. Ask the following questions:
•	 What value might understanding preschoolers have for people who intend to   
 teach adolescents? 
•	 What can we learn from the study of  preschoolers we know from home  
 and community? 
Take one or two comments for each question.
Planning the project (about 20 minutes)
Choose a project or field observation. Form groups of  three to five Student Teachers, 
which will plan their field project.
Student Teachers will be asked to locate behavioural differences between a three-year-
old child and a five-year-old child.
Ambassadors (20 minutes)
Instruct groups to send half  their group to meet with another group. Each half-group 
will have 10 minutes to present their plan of  action for observing the children aged 
three and five to gather feedback. Groups will then return to their original planning 
groups. They will now have two sets of  opinions on their plan to use in revision (one 
from the ambassadors who ‘travelled’ to another group and one from the ambassa-
dors who visited their group).
Circulate among groups and make notes of  ideas that are promising or that will 
present difficulty .
Plan revision (5 minutes)
Use observational notes made during the ambassadors activity to point out what will 
make a good plan for observation. 
Groups will revise their plans during out-of-class time, prepare for and then discuss 
their subject, and prepare for the presentation in the second session of  the unit. 
The presentation of  the plan may be made in Session 11, and of  observations collect-
ed during out-of-class time and what they have observed in Session 12.
Option 2
Introduction (5 minutes)
Introduce the topic of  preschool development. Have Student Teachers recall some of  
the developmental milestones of  toddlers and preschool children. 
Note on the board as many milestones that Student Teachers mention as time permits.
You may wish to make a ‘preschool child fact sheet’ and have Student Teachers 
develop their own fact sheet and compare with your fact sheet.
58
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Active lecture (30 minutes)
Present the three domains of  preschool child development—physical, cognitive, and 
emotional—using an active lecture approach. (See Week 1, session 2.) You may wish 
to include information from ‘College Students’ Beliefs about Pre-schoolers’ Literacy 
Development’ in Faculty Resources.
Designing an activity (20 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to pair up and design an activity that is developmentally appro-
priate for the three domains of  preschooler development. It should involve physical 
activity , thinking, and feeling.
As pairs are working, give each pair a large note card or paper (about one-half  letter size). 
The participants may write down their ideas to post on a graffiti wall for others to see. 
Encourage the participants to design activities that are culturally relevant and sensitive.
Week 4, session 11: Developmentally appropriate practices 
for preschool child development
Note: Instructor should use Option 1 for Session 11 if  they chose Option 1 in Week 4, 
session 10.
Option 1
Note: If  you plan to use this option, remember that you will need to provide time 
for Student Teachers to discuss what they learned from observing. You may want to 
do this during the next session or give them more time to complete the activity . The 
expectation for this assignment is that they get out and watch children, not that they 
develop sophisticated plans and carry them out with perfection. The focus should be 
on what they learned, not the write-up of  a report.
Introduction (5 minutes) 
Talk briefly about the purposes of  observing young children and establish the purpose 
for the lesson.
Presentations of observation plans (30–40 minutes)
Ask the groups to present their observation plans. Each has five minutes to present. 
Allow five minutes for questions and critique.
Lecture (10 minutes)
Review what makes a good observation. Without embarrassing groups with weaker 
plans, call attention to exemplary parts of  plans from several groups (e.g. one that has 
selected a realistic setting, planned who will observe what and when, or developed an 
observation protocol).
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
59
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Option 2
Introduction (15 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to do a gallery walk to look at the activities posted on the 
graffiti wall.
After they have had about 10 minutes to look, ask if  there is anything they notice 
about the activities they want to comment on. Remind them that this is not an evalu-
ation activity but an activity to consider and think of  ways of  doing things.Ask: ‘What 
makes one activity more developmentally appropriate than another?’ Elicit three or 
four opinions without comment.
Active lecture (30 minutes)
Talk about developmentally appropriate practice using an interactive lecture. Be sure 
to point out that the concept of  ‘developmentally appropriate’ has been criticized. 
Pause in the lecture and give Student Teachers five minutes to brainstorm about why 
the concept of  ‘developmentally appropriate’ might have come under scrutiny and 
debate. Elicit three to four ideas before continuing. 
Point out how Bruner’s idea of  scaffolding may help children go beyond what we 
traditionally expect of  children. 
You may want to review Vygotsky’s notion of  the zone of  proximal development. 
Student reflection (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to consider the challenges of  using developmentally appropriate 
activities in classrooms they know about (e.g. where there might be crowded condi-
tions or poor facilities). How could these challenges be overcome?
Sharing (5 minutes)
Elicit as many comments as time permits.
Week 4, session 12: Unit review
Note: This would be a good time to organize Student Teacher presentations of  their 
observations of  children. 
Option 1
Reflection (30 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to individually write one or two reflections on what they 
learned about toddler and pre-primary child development that changed their way of  
thinking about how children grow up and learn.
Have groups of  three or four exchange papers to read one other person’s reflections.
60
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Ask the group to discuss reactions and observations about what they have read. Ask 
Student Teachers to be prepared to share one shared observation or reaction with the class.
Whole-class discussion (10 minutes)
Lead the class in sharing what they noticed or observed when doing the activity and 
reading each other’s papers.
Concept formation (20 minutes) 
Review the major themes and concepts of  the unit by having Student Teachers cate-
gorize a list of  characteristics of  children in each of  the three groups studied. 
Place a complete set of  labels/terms on each table and ask the group to organize 
them into infant, toddler, and preschool groups. Create a handout with the labels/
terms in the three categories you are expecting. Distribute the handout about five 
minutes before the session ends so that Student Teachers can compare their categori-
zation with yours. In this activity you are thinking of  set groups, so you are checking 
for concept attainment.
Summary and closure 
Make comments after observing the concept activity .
Option 2
Revisiting our graphic organizers (40 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to return to the group that they worked in during Session 10. An easy 
way to do this would be to have them find their poster as well as a find a place to work.
Have each group who worked on a poster look at it again and consider what they 
might want to add or change before moving on.
Ask each group to find another group who worked on the stage immediately before 
or after the one they depicted (e.g. infant might choose toddler; toddler can choose 
either infant or preschool). Be sure every group has another group to work with.
Ask the combined groups to create a visual ‘bridge’ that shows transition points 
between the two stages. Hand out poster paper for them to use in creating their 
bridge. They may wish to choose another symbol for transition points. 
Question and answer (20 minutes)
Display the bridge posters around the room. Invite the class to join you at each poster. 
Give each group a minute to say something about their bridge. Use the posters as a 
way of  reviewing major themes and concepts of  the unit. Point out items that might 
be added or need more clarification.
 UNIT     3  PRIMARY SCHOOL-AGE 
 CHILD DEVELOPMENT
62
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Overview
The physical, cognitive, emotional, and social development of  children aged 6 to 12 
years is explored. Emphasis is on understanding the whole child. Student Teachers will 
analyse stages of  development during this critical period of  growth. They will have 
the opportunity to consider how early childhood development can inform their study 
of  primary child development.
Week # T opics/themes
5
Introduction to primary school-age child development
Aspects of  physical development
Encouraging healthy physical development
6
Cognitive development: Overview and Piaget’s concrete 
operational theory
Cognitive development: Industriousness and intelligences
Emotional development
7
Social development: Changes and parental roles
Social development: Peer interaction, friendship, and growth
Utilizing play in the classroom 
8 Teacher’s influence on student motivation and unit 
conclusion
Learning goals 
 l identify stages of  development for primary-age children
 l recognize the interconnected nature of  physical, cognitive, emotional, and social   
 elements of  development for young children
 l analyse developmental processes from the perspective of  major theorists
 l consider practices that support development for the whole child.
Essential questions
•	 What developmental changes take place around the time children begin   
 primary school?
•	 Why do primary-age children learn and develop at different paces?
•	 How do family and peer relationships affect the way children think  
 of  themselves?
•	 How do aspects of  children’s development affect their learning in and out of  school?
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
63
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Enduring understandings
•	 Development is an integrated system of  parts, and strong development in each  
 of  these categories is essential for a happy and healthy child.
•	 Primary-age children should be engaged and active in and out of  the classroom  
 by having projects, activities, and ample time for free and structured play . 
•	 Children need to be treated with love, affection, and respect by their parents   
 and friends.
Additional resources 
D. Bergen, ‘The Role of  Pretend Play in Children’s Cognitive Development’, Early 
Childhood Research and Practice, 4 (2002).
 Ø http://ecrp.uiuc.edu/v4n1/bergen.html
Early Childhood Development (ECD) Pakistan website.
 Ø http://www .ecdpak.com
‘Fact Sheet: A Summary of  the Rights under the Convention on the Rights of  the 
Child’. www .unicef.org/crc/files/Rights_overview .pdf
Free Play Network. ‘Play in educational settings consultation paper’.
 Ø http://www .freeplaynetwork.org.uk/schools/index.html
Kenneth R. Ginsburg, ‘The Importance of  Play in Promoting Healthy Child Development 
and Maintaining Strong Parent-Child Bonds’, Pediatrics, 119 (2007), 182–91. 
 Ø http://aappolicy .aappublications.org/cgi/content/full/pediatrics;119/1/182
Hands on Scotland. ‘Emotional balance’. 
 Ø http://www .handsonscotland.co.uk/flourishing_and_wellbeing_in_children_
and_young_people/emotional_balance/emotional_balance.html
Magna Systems. ‘Middle Childhood: Physical Growth and Development’ Teaching Guide’. 
 Ø http://www .magnasystems.com/_guides/1025_Middle_Childhood_Physical_
Growth_and_Development_Guide.pdf
H. A. Qayyum and S. Nadeem, ‘Stress Management for Children and Adults’, Nurture: 
Pakistan’s Pioneer Publication on Early Childhood Development, 2010. 
 Ø http://www .ecdpak.com/nurture/Nurture-9/stress_management_for_children_
and_adults_page_2.html
64
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Resources for this unit in Faculty Resources
Student T eacher readings
‘Going Deeper: An Overview of  Piaget’s Theory of  Concrete Operations’
‘Gardner’s Theory of  Multiple Intelligences’
‘Environmental Strategies to Support Multiple Intelligences’ 
‘Five Ways to Support Healthy Emotions’ 
‘Children and Stress’ 
‘Ways to Prevent Bullying in School’ 
‘Managing Conflict in the Classroom’
‘Myths about Conflict’
‘The Right Way to Play’ 
‘The Right to Play’
‘What Excellent Teachers Do’
Faculty resources
‘School Health Programme: A Strategic Approach for Improving Health and 
Education in Pakistan’ 
Student T eacher activities
‘ Assessing Abilities in Primary Childhood’ 
‘Vignettes on Peer Interaction’ 
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
65
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Unit 3: Session planning guide
Week 5, session 13: Introduction to primary school-age 
child development
Option 1
Introduction to the new unit (5 minutes) 
Introduce the three-week unit on primary-age child development, looking at key physi-
cal, cognitive, emotional, and social developmental processes as well as major theorists.
Reflection and pair work (10 minutes) 
Participants think about major aspects of  pre-primary development discussed during 
the previous two weeks and how they affect children’s development. 
Ask: ‘How might certain experiences foster or hinder the development of  a prima-
ry-age child, and what actions were suggested to encourage healthy development?’ 
Student Teachers then discuss in pairs.
Lecture (25 minutes) 
Give a brief  overview of  who the primary-age child is and the changes that take 
place during the primary stage of  development. Also briefly note relevant theorists 
(Erikson, Piaget, Bruner, and Vygotsky) and the challenges that children at this age 
face as their bodies, minds, and experiences change.
Writing activity (15 minutes)
Ask participants to think about and write down notes from their field observations 
how teachers interact with their children. 
Ask: ‘What are your impressions about how the teacher considers the developmental 
needs of  their children?’ At the end of  the course, Student Teachers may come back to 
these observations and thoughts and note what has or has not changed.
 
Option 2
Introduction to the new unit, writing activity (10 minutes) 
Have Student Teachers think of  a child they know between the ages of  6 and 11. 
Describe the child currently in as much detail as possible, including physical character-
istics, language, and behaviours. 
After they have written for about 10 minutes, ask: ‘What are the biggest changes you 
notice since last year about this time?’ Elicit four or five comments. Have Student 
Teachers keep their written descriptions out to refer to during the lecture.
66
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Active lecture (40 minutes) 
Give a brief  overview using an active lecture method on who the primary-age child 
is and the changes that take place during this stage of  development. Briefly note 
theorists they have studied and how they describe this period of  development.
Pause after about 10 minutes and ask them to look at their notes about a child they know 
to consider if  any of  the information you have discussed applies. Make note if  it does.
Ask Student Teachers to share their notes and ideas with a peer sitting next to them.
Continue the lecture. You should pause at least three times for Student Teachers to 
compare notes about their child with information you are sharing. Give them five 
minutes to compare and peer share.
Reflection (10 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to write down one important thing they learned that applies to 
the child they described. Allow one to two minutes.
As time permits, have Student Teachers share their one written comment with the 
whole class.
Ask them to keep their notes about the child they know and bring them to the next session.
Week 5, session 14: Aspects of physical development
Option 1
In advance of  teaching this option, prepare a fact sheet on physical characteristics of  
primary school-age children. (You could refer to the fact sheets in Faculty Resources 
about preschool children and toddlers for ideas about what to include.) 
Reflection (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to quickly write a description of  the physical attributes of  the 
child or children they are observing and compare with the physical characteristics of  
the child they described in Session 13. (If  they are doing a child study , they should use 
this child.) 
Ask: ‘Do the children seem to have the same physical characteristics?’ 
Participants who are not observing primary-age children can pair with peers who are 
observing primary-age children for this activity .
Small groups read and discuss a text (30 minutes)
If  reading in English is still a challenge for the Student Teachers, consider reading the 
text with them and having them discuss the questions in small groups. Alternatively , 
work with a group or groups that will have more difficulty than others.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
67
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Distribute the pre-prepared fact sheet on physical characteristics of  primary school-
age children. Have Student Teachers work in groups of  three to four to read and 
discuss the document. Make sure groups have at least one member who has good 
English-language reading skills. 
Ask them to consider the following questions as they read together:
•	 What are the big changes that you notice in the transition from preschool to   
 primary school age?
•	 What do you think these physical characteristics suggest about designing an   
 appropriate school environment for children during this period?
•	 Why do you think physical activity is so important at this age?
Summary and discussion (10 minutes)
Make summary comments about physical growth, health, and safety based on what 
you hear Student Teachers discussing in their groups. Note any misconceptions or 
issues. If  time permits, have groups share answers to the questions they discussed.
Pair-share (10 minutes)
As a concluding thought-provoking activity , have participants work with another 
Student Teacher and discuss the following: ‘How do children use space?’
To offer an example and to help get the discussion started, you could remind the class 
that primary-age schoolchildren share their time in many different types of  indoor and 
outdoor spaces. 
One question you could pose might be: ‘How do children utilize different types of  
spaces for non-classroom learning?’ Ask Student Teachers to name as many spaces as 
they can where they have noticed children playing.
Option 2
Prepare a fact sheet for physical characteristics of  primary-age children. Give it to Student 
Teachers prior to this session as an assigned reading. Ask them to bring it to class.
Active lecture (25 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to refer to the fact sheet during your lecture. Discuss the chang-
es that occur during the transition from pre-primary to primary-age development and 
changes that continue over the course of  the five- to six-year primary period. Focus 
on the importance of  keeping children physically active. Chunk the lecture into two 
sections so there can be discussion about what you are presenting. You might ask 
Student Teachers to refer to the fact sheet to check which characteristics have been 
mentioned, or you might have them pair-share following a chunk, discussing the 
following question: ‘How will you use this information to plan appropriate school 
environments for children?’
Group role-playing activity (25 minutes) 
Divide Student Teachers into groups of  four or five. Give each Student Teacher a 
different content area to think about as a teacher (such as Urdu, literacy , math, or 
social studies teacher).
68
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Explain the following role play:
•	 The school is planning an all-day outdoor field day event. You are especially   
 focused on the content area you have been assigned and want to take advantage  
 of  the field day to strengthen children’s learning.
•	 Given your content area and desire to strengthen children’s learning, what are  
 your learning goals for them on this day?
•	 Think of  one or two outdoor activities for children that can help fulfil this goal.
Discussion (10 minutes)
Ask groups to share their ideas and make suggestions and critique. Summarize key points.
Week 5, session 15: Encouraging healthy physical 
development
Option 1
Brief discussion (10 minutes) 
Pose each question to Student Teachers to discuss as a whole class. Invite opinions, 
including differences of  opinion. Probe but do not evaluate their opinions (e.g. ask 
questions such as ‘Can you say more about that?’ ‘What makes you think so?’ and ‘Do 
other people share this opinion?’).
•	 What are some of  the biggest health concerns facing children in Pakistan? In   
 this province? 
•	 What kind of  knowledge about healthy living and disease prevention is age   
 appropriate for primary-age children? 
•	 Who should be responsible for imparting information to children about healthy  
 living and disease prevention?
Mini-lecture (20 minutes)
Give an overview of  the importance of  supporting healthy physical development 
and of  using the school as a place to encourage healthy practices related to nutrition, 
exercise, and oral care. 
Group activity (20 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to brainstorm games they know that introduce positive prac-
tices for physical development to primary-age children. Be prepared to explain what 
practices are promoted by the game.
Alternatively , ask Student Teachers to discuss and be prepared to present an idea of  
how they would teach primary-age children about one aspect of  healthy living. Topics 
can include diet and nutrition, exercise, hygiene, oral hygiene, and disease prevention.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
69
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Sharing and discussion (15 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to share what they have learned and give them the opportunity 
to ask questions about terms and concepts. 
If  there is not sufficient time, try using an ambassador activity so that every group can 
share its ideas with at least one other group. (See Unit 2, Week 3, Session 8 for more 
information about using Ambassadors.) 
Assignment 
Ask Student Teachers to read ‘School Health Programme: A Strategic Approach for 
Improving Health and Education in Pakistan’, in Faculty Resources. Those who have 
access may find the full document online.
Option 2
Assignment prior to class 
Ask Student Teachers to read ‘School Health Programme: A Strategic Approach for 
Improving Health and Education in Pakistan’, in Faculty Resources. Those who have 
access may find the full document online (see reference located on the reading list). 
Ask them to bring the document to class.
Discussion (10 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers as a class to recall the first health-related habits they formed 
as children or the first habits they imparted to their children (if  applicable). Elicit as 
many responses as time permits, and ask Student Teachers to avoid mentioning habits 
that have already been mentioned. 
Ask: ‘Why don’t all children come to school with good health-related habits?’ Elicit as 
many answers as time permits. Do not judge the answers, simply receive them.
Discussion of reading (20 minutes) 
Have Student Teachers meet in groups of  four or five to review the assigned reading. 
Ask them all to take notes, as one of  them will be asked to report for the group. Ask 
them to decide on a position as a group on the following questions:
•	 Are health and safety behaviours the responsibility of  school? Be able to justify  
 your position.
•	 In addition to what is mentioned in the strategic paper, what are obstacles that  
 prevent children from learning and/or adopting healthy habits and practices?
•	 If  a school is unable to provide all the facilities recommended in the strategic   
 paper, what alternatives might be provided in order to have a school available   
 for children? Are some facilities more crucial than others?
•	 Can or should teachers attempt to influence families and communities to adopt  
 new health practices? 
70
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Reporting (15 minutes)
Ask someone from each group to report. Begin with the first question and have each 
group report on it before moving on to the next. Keep comments brief. Comment on 
points of  disagreement in the first question. If  there are none, question why or why not.
If  you do not have time to get to all groups, appoint two members in each group to 
list their ideas and post them on the graffiti wall.
Group brainstorm activity (25 minutes)
Participants continue in their groups and come up with strategies to overcome chil-
dren’s obstacles to forming healthy practices. Ask Student Teachers to share as a class. 
Debrief  and review important points and answer questions.
Week 6, session 16: Cognitive development—Overview 
and Piaget’s concrete operational theory
Option 1
Reflecting on primary-age children (20 minutes)
Ask participants to individually complete the handout ‘ Assessing Abilities in Primary 
Childhood’, in Faculty Resources, and compare in pairs. 
Go over the answers as a class and discuss areas of  disagreement or confusion. Note 
that many of  the answers will depend entirely on the child. They may also bring out 
some of  the criticisms of  Piaget that you will address in the active lecture.
Active lecture (30 minutes)
Review how primary-age children construct knowledge and acquire new cognitive and 
linguistic skills and abilities using Piaget’s theory of  concrete operations.
Discuss Piaget’s theory on the transition from the pre-primary preoperational stage to 
the concrete operational stage. Include critique.
Remember to chunk information in 10- to 15-minute segments, with time for Student 
Teachers to review notes taken or engage in a structured activity that you have 
planned to reinforce the lecture.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
71
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Reflection (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to write a one-minute reaction paper to the class session, and 
then pair-share their reaction papers (each person reading and listening).
Ask: ‘Why do you think Piaget has had so much influence on primary education 
around the world?’ Accept opinions. Share your opinion in summary .
You may want to assign ‘Going Deeper: An Overview of  Piaget’s Theory of  Concrete 
Operations’, in Faculty Resources, as a follow-up to the reading.
Option 2
Assignment 
Prior to class, ask Student Teachers to review ‘Going Deeper: An Overview of  Piaget’s 
Theory of  Concrete Operations’, in Faculty Resources.
Preparing a presentation for parents (45 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to work together in small groups to prepare a 10-minute 
presentation suitable for parents using a poster, PowerPoint presentation, or overhead 
transparencies to describe cognitive development in primary-age children. Ask them 
to draw on readings and notes from Unit 1 (especially the reading and chart in Faculty 
Resources) as well as their assigned reading. 
Include:
•	 Cognitive developmental characteristics
•	 Piaget’s theory of  conservation
•	 Critiques of  Piaget’s theory (their own or those they find in their research)
Have them make notes on slips of  paper or note cards that you distribute about points 
they are unsure of  and on which they would like you to provide clarification.
Question and answer (15 minutes) 
Have groups meet as a whole and collect note cards. Take each in turn and provide an 
explanation. Point out that they will need to work on their presentation in out-of-class 
time and be prepared to share it with another group.
72
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 6, session 17: Cognitive development: Industriousness 
and intelligences
Note: In this session, the theory of  multiple intelligences is briefly introduced. You 
may want to spend more time on this topic. If  so, addition information is provided at 
the end of  the session. 
Option 1
Small group classroom design (40 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers: Given what you now know about child development, including 
cognitive development, how would you set up a primary school classroom? 
Ask them to work in pairs to create a classroom ‘map’, or three-dimensional design. 
They can use any of  a variety of  materials, such as small blocks, pebbles, cardboard 
cylinders from toilet paper and paper towel rolls, pieces of  cardboard, and bits of  
paper. Invite them to show how they would set up a primary school classroom to 
encourage interaction and learning. Suggest that they label parts of  their classroom 
with the name of  a theorist they will use to justify their choice (e.g. if  they have a 
large cardboard box with a hole cut in the top for ventilation where children can crawl 
to have quiet alone time, they might label it ‘Erikson’s macrocosmic play space’).
Gallery walk lecture (20 minutes)
Point out that you are going to give a lecture tour of  the classroom designs. Have 
everyone walk around with you to see what others have done. One person in each 
group should be prepared to explain features if  it is necessary . Look for examples 
in the designs that illustrate points you want to make about changes in children’s 
cognitive development, Erikson’s goals of  encouraging industriousness by building 
competency , and how children exhibit different strengths at different times and in 
different activities. Introduce the concept of  different kinds of  intelligence. 
Ask Student Teachers to think about the following two questions as they complete the 
assignment for this session in their out-of-class time:
•	 What do you think about Erikson’s view that healthy primary-age child   
 development is contingent on building competency? 
•	 What other concepts or skills are essential for building cognitive development?
 
Assignment 
Have Student Teachers make a one-page informational sheet for parents. Choose one 
type of  intelligence and list three activities that parents can do with their children to 
facilitate industriousness and build competency . 
If  you assign the information sheet activity , take about 10 minutes at the beginning 
of  the next class to have Student Teachers do a pair-share of  their activities. Ask them 
to be critical friends with each other. A critical friend will offer helpful, constructive 
feedback rather than accepting or agreeing with everything. A critical friend will not 
be harsh and demeaning.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
73
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Ask Student Teachers to read ‘Gardner’s Theory of  Multiple Intelligences’, in Faculty 
Resources. Encourage them to use ‘Environmental Strategies to Support Multiple 
Intelligences’, in Faculty Resources, to compare with their list of  activities. Ask them to 
bring these to the next class.
Option 2
Assignment 
Prior to class, have Student Teachers read ‘Gardner’s Theory of  Multiple 
Intelligences’, in Faculty Resources.
Presentations (40 minutes)
Pair each group with one other group. If  necessary , three groups can work together or 
the whole class can view one of  the presentations. (If  so, select a group who volun-
teers.) Have each group take 20 minutes to share their presentation with their partner 
group and get feedback from their peers in the partner group. 
Be sure to have someone keep strict time so that one group does not take all the time 
at the expense of  the second.
Mini-lecture (15 minutes)
Talk about changes in children’s cognitive development, Erikson’s goals of  encour-
aging industriousness by building competency , and how children exhibit different 
strengths at different times and in different activities. Introduce the concept of  
different kinds of  intelligence.
Reflection (5 minutes)
Ask participants to reflect in journals about strategies for building competency in 
children from a parental or teacher’s perspective. Ask them to consider in what ways 
this promotes social development. Ask volunteers to share insights and suggestions 
and then summarize key points.
Note: Howard Gardner’s theory of multiple intelligences
Some faculty may want to spend more time on Gardner’s theory of multiple intelligences. 
Most educators agree that the underlying principle that IQ cannot contain all intelligence 
is common sense. They also agree that individuals have different domains of knowing 
and strengths. Gardner’s theory was welcomed by primary school teachers as vindication 
that children learn in multiple ways, so you may want to spend more time than is allowed 
here on Gardner’s theory. This might be done by assigning ‘Gardner’s Theory of Multiple 
Intelligences’ in Faculty Resources or organizing a session around the topic.
However, it is important to note that the theory has been soundly critiqued. Any session 
plan that includes presentation of Gardner’s theory in detail should also examine critiques. 
Researchers argue that there are no published studies to confirm the validity of multiple 
intelligences. ‘In 2004 Gardner asserted that he would be “delighted were such evidence 
to accrue” (p. 214), and he admitted that “MI theory has few enthusiasts among psycho -
metricians or others of a traditional psychological background” because they require
74
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 6, session 18: Emotional development
Option 1
Individual reflection (5 minutes)
Ask participants to write in their journals about the following questions:
•	 What environmental changes take place at the beginning of  the primary years? 
•	 What new stressors and challenges do children have to adjust to?
Active lecture (40 minutes)
Discuss key aspects of  emotional development, focusing on helping children name 
and manage emotions, issues of  stress, and self-esteem. 
Consider having Student Teachers work in pairs following each 10- to 15-minute 
chunk of  information to give examples from their experience to illustrate key points.
Group activity (10 minutes)
Ask participants to discuss in small groups examples of  how emotions are treated in 
the classrooms they are observing. Ask them to discuss these questions:
•	 What examples of  children expressing strong emotion have they seen in the   
 classroom, on the playground, or as children go to and from school?
•	 What practices and daily strategies for managing stress do they notice (both   
 negative and positive)?
•	 What support for healthy emotions and stress management would be helpful in  
 the classrooms they are observing?
Summary (5 minutes) 
Have Student Teachers share ideas generated in groups as time permits.
“psychometric or experimental evidence that allows one to prove the existence of the 
several intelligences”.’ (Waterhouse, p. 208.) 
Howard Gardner, Changing Minds: The Art and Science of Changing Our Own and Other 
People’s Minds. (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2004), 196.
Lynn Waterhouse, ‘Multiple Intelligences, the Mozart Effect, and Emotional Intelligence: A 
Critical Review’, Educational Psychologist, 41 (2006), 207–25.
For additional critiques of Gardner’s multiple intelligences theory, refer to ‘Critiques by 
Those Who Question Multiple Intelligences Theory’ at: 
 Ø www.igs.net/~cmorris/critiques.html.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
75
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Assignment
Ask Student Teachers to read ‘Children and Stress’ in Faculty Resources.
Ask them to write in reflective journals a response to the questions: How should 
parents and teachers deal with overactive or stressed children? What is the place of  
punishment? What is the place of  prevention?
Option 2
Assignment 
Prior to class distribute and ask Student Teachers to read ‘Children and Stress’ from 
Faculty Resources. Have them bring their copies to class.
Introduction (10 minutes) 
Have Student Teachers write in their journals. Ask the following: ‘Think of  a time in 
primary school in which you had a very strong emotional reaction to something or 
somebody and write about it. Don’t spend time trying to choose something. Write 
about the first thing that pops into your mind. You may have been really angry or 
disappointed or frustrated, or you may have been really happy or excited’. Ask them 
to describe: 
•	 What happened 
•	 Where it happened
•	 Who was involved
•	 How they felt when it was over
Suggest that if  they want to, they can find a group of  peers and share what they have 
written during out-of-class time.
Point out that emotions as well as the events that trigger them have a lasting effect on us.
Text-against-text (40 minutes)
Hand out copies of  ‘Five Ways to Support Healthy Emotions’ from Faculty Resources. 
Have Student Teachers read together and compare to ‘Children and Stress’. Ask them 
to answer the following questions:
•	 What are the author’s main points in each article?
•	 What would the author of  ‘Five Ways to Support Healthy Emotions’ be likely  
 to say to the author of  ‘Children and Stress’?
•	 How can teachers benefit from these articles?
Discussion (10 minutes)
Lead the class in a large group discussion of  the issues raised by the three questions. 
Help Student Teachers clarify their thinking and correct their misconceptions about 
emotional development and health.
76
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Option 3
An additional option would be to show a PowerPoint presentation from the 
website Virtual Psychology (www .virtualpsychology .co.uk/powerpoint/
PiagetsCognitiveDevelopment.ppt) or another website. There are several pre-
sentations available online and may be found with a quick search for ‘Piaget’ and 
‘PowerPoint’. In addition, criticisms of  Piaget’s studies are important for Student 
Teachers to consider.
Some researchers suggest that Piaget:
•	 Underestimated the importance of  knowledge 
•	 Underestimated the ability of  children
•	 Underestimated the impact of  culture 
•	 Ignored the impact of  the social setting and children’s reaction to the adults   
 who guided the studies.
Week 7, session 19: Social development—Changes and 
parental roles
Option 1
Lead-in discussion (15 minutes)
Ask groups to create a web, map, or visual representation that shows as many differ-
ent types of  relationships that primary-age children have that they can think of, in 
order from the strongest relationship to the least strong. Put these on chart paper. Ask 
Student Teachers to do the following:
•	 Show how you weight or rank the relationships in terms of  influence and   
 importance to the child. 
•	 Show how you think each relationship can support positive development.
Gallery walk (15 minutes)
Ask groups to visit the posters. They should try to visit as many of  the posters as they 
can in the allotted time. Have one group member remain with the group’s chart to 
explain it to visitors.
Mini-lecture (15 minutes)
While Student Teachers are working and during the gallery walk, take notes that you 
will use to build on in the mini-lecture. Key points:
•	 The changing relationship between children and parents as children reach school  
 age, emphasizing the importance of  continued love, support, and affection.
•	 How parental relationships affect relationships children have at school with   
 teachers and other children.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
77
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Small groups brainstorm (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers the following questions:
•	 What can teachers learn from parents that will help them be better teachers?
•	 What can parents do to support the child’s learning at school?
Option 2
Assignment 
Prior to class, ask each person in half  the class to each conduct a 15-minute interview 
with a primary school teacher to find out:
•	 What can teachers learn from parents that will help them be better teachers?
•	 What can parents do to support the child’s learning at school?
Ask the other half  of  the class to conduct a 15-minute interview with a parent of  a 
primary school child to find out their opinions on the same two questions.
Have them bring notes to class for discussion.
Small groups compare interview notes (30 minutes)
Place participants in small groups of  six. To the extent possible, half  of  each group 
should have parent interviews and half  should have teacher interviews. 
Have groups share answers to the two questions. Ask Student Teachers to think about 
how perspectives match or do not match. 
Take notes. Be prepared to summarize the discussion without going into great detail.
Whole-class discussion (25 minutes)
Guide the class in sharing what they learned from conducting and comparing  
the interviews.
As the opportunity presents itself  in the discussion, call attention to the changing 
relationship between children and parents as children reach primary school age. 
Emphasize the importance of  continued love, support, and affection.
Reflection (5 minutes)
Ask participants to list ideas of  strategies for both parents and teachers to encourage 
independence for their children or students.
78
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 7, session 20: Social development—Peer interaction, 
friendship, and growth
Option 1
Assignment 
Prior to class, assign Student Teachers one of  the three readings from Faculty Resources 
for this session (‘Ways to Prevent Bullying in School’, ‘Managing Conflict in the 
Classroom’, and ‘Myths about Conflict’). Tell them that they will be responsible for 
sharing the basic ideas in the article they read with other class members.
Jigsaw of readings (30 minutes) 
Place Student Teachers in groups of  six. Where possible, include two members who 
have read each article so that all three assigned readings are represented. Assign one 
member to be a timekeeper.
Ask people who read each article to collaborate in summarizing its main points in no 
more than five minutes, allowing another five minutes for people to ask for clarification.
Applying readings (20 minutes)
Give each group ‘Vignettes on Peer Interaction’ from Faculty Resources. Have the 
groups choose ‘Naeem’ or ‘Qamar’ to work with. 
Ask them to answer the questions posed in the vignette, using the text set they have 
just discussed in their jigsaw to support their decisions.
Reporting (10 minutes) 
Lead the class in reporting their discussion as time permits. Listen for misconceptions 
of  peer relationships, social competency , and indicators of  challenging behaviour.
Option 2
Pair-share (20 minutes) 
Using ‘Vignettes on Peer Interaction’ from Faculty Resources, hand out the vignette for 
‘Naeem’ to half  the pairs and give the other half  the vignette for ‘Qamar’.
Ask pairs to take 20 minutes to read and come up with answers to the questions posed.
Observe pairs and takes note of  misconceptions, assumptions, and the like.
Discussion (10 minutes)
Lead the class in discussing how they went about their task. Ask the following questions:
•	 What did they find challenging? 
•	 What did they want to know that wasn’t in the vignette? 
•	 What misconceptions did they bring to the task?
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
79
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Raise these questions to think about: 
•	 Is the teacher’s job to solve all problems? 
•	 Why? Why not?’
Active lecture (25 minutes) 
Talk about children’s peer relationships, the importance of  friendship, building social 
competency , and indicators of  pro-social behaviour. You may want to draw on read-
ings from Faculty Resources for this session and assign one or all of  them as a follow-up 
to the reading. Chunk your lecture so that Student Teachers have time to compare 
notes or raise questions.
Reflection (5 minutes) 
Ask participants to reflect individually and then discuss in pairs the prompt: how can 
conflict be a good experience?
Week 7, session 21: Utilizing play in the classroom 
Student Teachers should have observed children playing before this session. Ask them 
to consider while conducting their observations how play is encouraged and/or 
limited during school, if  children go outside, what kinds of  toys they play with, and if  
play is encouraged through class activities.  
Option 1
Assignment
Ask Student Teachers to read ‘The Right Way to Play’ in Faculty Resources.
Individual reflection (5 minutes)
Ask participants to use field notes to estimate how much time the children they are 
observing spend playing at school. Ask:
•	 What kinds of  activities and games are they playing? 
•	 With whom are they playing?
Text-against-text (40 minutes)
Hand out copies of  ‘The Right to Play’ (based on Article 31 of  the UN Convention on 
the Rights of  the Child).
Ask small groups of  four or five Student Teachers to go over the article. Be sure to 
group Student Teachers so that at least one English-proficient person is in each group.
Ask Student Teachers to compare this article with ‘The Right Way to Play’. Ask them 
to consider the questions:
•	 Who is the target audience for each text?
•	 What is each article trying to convey?
•	 Are the purposes of  play at home the same as play in school?
80
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
•	 Think of  a primary-age school subject and a specific topic within that subject   
 (for example, math and the topic of  two-digit addition) you have observed   
 being taught. In what ways might play be used to teach the topic?
Group discussion (15 minutes)
Consider using the graphic ‘Quotable Quotes: What Experts Say about Play’, on page 
23 of  volume V , Nurture, http://www .ecdpak.com/nurture/nurture_5/quotable_
quotes.html. You might look at each quotation with the class and use it to discuss an 
aspect of  development (physical, cognitive, social, and emotional) enhanced by play 
discussed in the two articles.
An alternative would be to ask Student Teachers to write a statement in which they 
answer the question: why is play important in childhood? Organize discussion around 
their responses.
Option 2
Analysing children’s play (20 minutes) 
Have Student Teachers meet in small groups of  four to six members.
Ask Student Teachers to use field notes to compare how play is being used in different 
classrooms. Ask them to discuss the following:
•	 How much time do the children they are observing spend playing?
•	 What is the most time spent using play activities?
•	 What is the least time spent?
•	 What kinds of  activities and games are they playing? 
•	 Who are they playing with?
Mini-lecture (15 minutes)
Stress the importance of  play in primary school classrooms, both structured  
and unstructured.
You might give Student Teachers the reading ‘The Right to Play’, in Faculty Resources, 
and focus on the description of  the types of  play that can be used in classrooms.
Planning in small groups (20 minutes)
Divide the class into groups of  three or four. Ask Student Teachers to choose a primary 
grade, subject, and topic from the curriculum. Ask them to plan a classroom environ-
ment that will suggest unstructured play related to the topic. Ask the following:
•	 What might you put in different areas of  the classroom?
•	 If  the classroom does not have interest areas (e.g. building area with blocks, small 
boxes, and toilet paper and paper towel cylinders, for building things; math and 
science area with things to touch, feel, measure, and weigh; writing area with pencils, 
recycled paper, note pads, or little books to write in; or arts and crafts area with scis-
sors, paste, crayons, old magazines, and paper), what areas might you want to create?
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
81
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Plan a structured play activity to teach the topic.
Have a recorder write up notes about your plans to post on the graffiti wall for 
others to see.
Summary (5 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to share one or two points about what they’ve learned about 
the importance of  play or the challenges of  implementing play in schools. Encourage 
groups to look at ideas on the graffiti wall and offer each other helpful critique. 
Week 7, session 22: T eacher’s influence on student 
motivation and unit conclusion
Option 1
Assignment 
Prior to the session, have Student Teachers read ‘What Excellent Teachers Do’ in 
Faculty Resources for class.
Small group unit review (20 minutes) 
Form small groups of  four to six members. You will need at least five groups.
Assign each group one the five things excellent teachers do in the article they have just 
read. (You might want to paste each passage on a card or paper and hand out one to 
each group.)
Have each group read the passage they have been given and check with each other if  
they all understand it. Circulate during this activity and assist if  needed.
Ask them to brainstorm examples of  how primary school teachers demonstrate this 
characteristic. They may draw on their observations, readings, or personal experience.
Choose one of  the examples to share with the whole class.
Readers’ theatre and sharing (20 minutes) 
Choose five Student Teachers who have good skills in English. Assign each of  them a 
passage on one of  the things excellent teachers do. Ask them to be prepared to read it 
aloud to the whole class.
•	 Ask the first reader to read their passage.
•	 Ask the group assigned this passage to share their example.
•	 Take turns until all five passages have been read and examples shared.
Small group discussion (10 minutes)
Ask group members to reflect on the following question: ‘How do teachers acquire 
the skills and characteristics described in the article and our activity?’
List insights and ideas.
82
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Whole-class discussion
Take several ideas from the groups. Ask them to listen to each other so that if  one 
group has already mentioned something they listed, they should not repeat but 
mention that they thought of  it too.
If  it has not come up, point out that if  teachers understand child growth and develop-
ment, they are more likely to be able to engage in the kinds of  behaviours suggested 
by the article. 
Point out that motivation should not be an external gimmick that the teacher uses to 
make children do things they do not like to do. Motivation is most effective when it 
is based on a deep understanding of  how children grow and learn, and their physical, 
mental, and emotional needs.
Option 2
Assignment 
Prior to the session, ask Student Teachers to bring something (an object or picture) 
that represents one or two major things they have learned in this unit. It will be a 
symbol. It should be something they will be able to attach to a class display (nothing 
too valuable to leave).
Reflection and pair-share (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to remember a teacher from their childhood who really made 
them interested in learning about something.
Ask them to write a description of  that teacher in three to four minutes. Ask:
•	 What was it about the teacher that drew you in?
•	 Give an example of  something you remember learning about.
Pair-share: ask each person to read or describe what they have written.
Readers’ theatre and discussion (20 minutes)
Prior to class, choose five Student Teachers who have good skills in English. Give each 
of  them a paper or note card with one of  the five things excellent teachers do that are 
listed in the article ‘What Excellent Teachers Do’. Ask them to be prepared to read 
their assigned passage aloud to the whole class.
Ask the class: ‘What are some of  the kinds of  things that teachers you wrote about 
did that made you want to learn?’ Take several ideas.
Ask each reader to read their passage in turn.
Ask the class how the things they wrote about compare to these ideas. If  time permits, 
you may want to have each reader go over the passage again and ask if  anyone wrote 
about an experience that illustrates the point in the passage.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
83
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Ask: ‘How do you think teachers develop the skills and characteristics that describe 
excellent teachers?’ Take several answers.
If  no one mentions it, point out that teachers who understand child growth and devel-
opment are more likely to be able to engage in the kinds of  behaviours suggested by 
the readers’ theatre.
Distribute the article ‘What Excellent Teachers Do’ in Faculty Resources and ask them 
read it as an assignment.
Small group sharing of symbols (20 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to each take about three minutes to share the symbol they 
selected. Ask them to explain:
•	 Why they chose it.
•	 What it means.
•	 How they think it might connect to learning to be an excellent teacher.
Ask group members to place their symbols on poster paper. (A cardboard box cut and 
opened makes a good display if  resources are limited.) Ask each to write a brief  explanation.
Gallery walk (10 minutes)
Ask groups to look at each other’s work and talk about what has been learned over this unit.
 UNIT     4 ADOLESCENCE 
 AND DEVELOPMENT 
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
85
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Overview 
In this unit, Student Teachers will learn about the complex changes that children 
undergo as they reach adolescence. We will examine the impact of  these changes 
upon adolescent cognitive development, social development, and behaviours such as 
motivation and identity formation. We will also consider critiques of  adolescence as a 
developmental category .
Week # T opics/themes
8
Introduction and overview of  physical development
Social and emotional development I: Erikson and 
development of  self-identity 
9
Social and emotional development II: The adolescent 
peer group
Social and emotional development III: Motivation and 
self-regulation
Cognitive and linguistic development I: Piaget
10
Cognitive and linguistic development II: Vygotsky
Cognitive and individual differences
Conclusion and review 
Learning goals
 l demonstrate an understanding of  the importance of  adolescent development and  
 how it fits into the broader context of  child development
 l understand the interrelatedness between adolescent physical development and   
 theories of  cognitive/linguistic and social/emotional development
 l explain what major theorists said about adolescent development along the   
 continuum of  child and human development
 l recognize social and individual patterns and differences among adolescents
 l defend an opinion about the role of  adolescence as a developmental category
 l design age-appropriate classroom tasks and assessments. 
Essential questions
•	 How do differences in adolescent physical development relate to differences in  
 cognitive and social development?
•	 What role does society and culture play in adolescent growth and maturity?
•	 What is the appropriate role for the teacher in fostering an effective learning   
 environment for adolescents?
•	 In what ways might the developmental category of  adolescence be  
 ‘socially constructed’?
86
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Enduring understandings
•	 Although generalities can be made, there are wide discrepancies in the rate at  
 which adolescents develop.
•	 Adolescents can’t be understood separately from the environment in which   
 they learn and grow .
•	 Teachers have an important role to play in assisting adolescent growth and maturity .
Additional resources 
iloveindia.com, ‘ Adolescence Development’. 
 Ø http://www .iloveindia.com/parenting/parenting-teenagers/index.html
IslamWay Sisters, ‘ Adolescence’. 
 Ø http://sisters.islamway .com/modules.php?name=News&file=article&sid=261
K. Cherry , ‘Background and Key Concepts of  Piaget’s Theory’. 
 Ø http://psychology .about.com/od/piagetstheory/a/keyconcepts.htm
A. Khan, ‘Adolescents and Reproductive Health in Pakistan: A Literature Review’, Research 
Report No. 11 (Islamabad: The Population Council, Pakistan Office, 2000). 
 Ø http://www .popcouncil.org/pdfs/rr/rr_11.pdf
M. Krebs-Carter. Yale-New Haven Teachers Institute. ‘Ages in Stages: An Exploration of  
the Life Cycle Based on Erik Erikson’s Eight Stages of  Human Development’. 
 Ø http://www .yale.edu/ynhti/curriculum/units/1980/1/80.01.04.x.html
M. R. Mutahari, Imam Reza Network, ‘Teaching Permitted and Prohibited Relations to 
Muslim Children and Teenagers’. 
 Ø http://www .imamreza.net/eng/imamreza.php?id=4243
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
87
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Resources for this unit in Faculty Resources
Student T eacher readings
‘ Adolescents and Youth in Pakistan 2001–2002: A Nationally Representative Survey’
‘Identity Formation in Adolescent Life’
‘Supporting Emotional Literacy’
‘The Adolescent Peer Group: A Problem or Necessity?’
‘Language Development in Adolescents’
‘Measuring Intelligence’
Faculty resources
‘ Adolescence: A Social Construct?’
‘Key Points in Adolescent Development’
‘Research on Puberty Differences’
‘Gender Differences in Adolescent Development’
‘Cognitive Development of  Adolescents’ 
Student T eacher activities
‘Beliefs about Adolescence’ 
‘What Studies of  Adolescents Tell Us about Common Beliefs’ 
‘ Adolescent Motivation: Student Scenarios’ 
88
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 4: Session planning guide
Week 8, session 23: Introduction and overview of 
physical development 
Option 1
Readers’ theatre (10 minutes)
Have ‘Beliefs about Adolescence’ from Faculty Resources on tables or desks when 
Student Teachers arrive and encourage them to look at it as others arrive.
Point out that this is the beginning of  a new unit on adolescent development and they 
will encounter very different views about the topic. The beliefs listed on the handout 
represent some of  the ideas people have about adolescents.
Ask five people to stand, each reading one of  the five beliefs.
Ask people to keep the handout to complete along with their assignment at the end of  
the session.
Text-against-text (40 minutes)
Divide the class into five groups. Hand out ‘ Adolescents and Youth in Pakistan 2001–
2002’ from Faculty Resources. 
Review the introduction and conclusion sections with the whole class.
Assign each group one of  the paragraphs reporting findings about the social context 
of  people’s lives, education, work, etc.
Allow time for each group to read and understand the paragraph assigned to them 
(time will vary with the English skills of  the Student Teachers).
Ask each group to report on its paragraph so that all groups are aware of  the informa-
tion in the report. 
Hand out the ‘Physical Development’ section of  ‘Key Points in Adolescent Development’ 
in Faculty Resources, or a summary of  puberty and physical development you create. 
Point out that some critics of  adolescent development theory suggest that the idea of  
adolescence is a social construction and very Western, and that it is a more applicable 
to affluent societies where people between the ages of  14 and 19 have the leisure to 
live without having to support themselves and their families and the opportunity for 
continued education.
Challenge the group to look at the description of  physical development and critique 
it in light of  their own knowledge of  Pakistani youth and ‘ Adolescents and Youth in 
Pakistan 2001–2002’.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
89
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
What suggestions, if  any , do they have for the lists in ‘Key Points in Adolescent 
Development’ under ‘How do these changes affect teens? and ‘What can you do?’
Discussion (10 minutes)
Find out if  there were any changes the groups wanted to make. Why? Why not?
Establish purposes for the unit, building on the activity they have just completed. 
Highlight physical developmental milestones.
Assignment
Complete the handout ‘Beliefs about Adolescents’ and read ‘What Studies of  
Adolescents Tell Us about Common Beliefs’.
Option 2
Brainstorming activity (10–15 minutes)
Student Teachers will need strips of  paper (recycled would be good) and markers or 
crayons. Say:
•	 Think back to when you were 13 or 14 years old. Think about words or short phrases  
 you would use to describe yourself  at that time. Try to think of  as many as possible.
•	 Choose one word or short phrase you feel is especially descriptive of  your early  
 adolescence and write it on the paper strip you have been given.
Have Student Teachers post their description on the white/chalk board.
Pair work: Thinking about physical development (40 minutes) 
Hand out a description of  adolescent physical development using an excerpt from 
‘Key Points in Adolescent Development’ in Faculty Resources or a summary of  puberty 
and physical development you create. 
Give pairs some time to look at the document together and see if  they can locate 
themselves in the description.
Ask if  they think the description is reflective of  Pakistani youth. What might they 
want to add to ‘How do these changes affect teens?’ and/or ‘What can you do?’ from 
‘Key Points in Adolescent Development’ in the Faculty Resources.
Provide each pair with one of  the following scenarios: 
•	 A 13-year-old girl in your class has a very strong body odour. You have noticed  
 that other girls avoid her. 
•	 A 12-year-old boy cannot seem to sit still in class. Although he is bright and   
 eager to answer questions correctly , he is disruptive and seems to lack the   
 ability to concentrate for long stretches.
•	 A 15-year-old girl has gained a great deal of  weight during the school year. Her  
 clothing does not fit well. She is very sensitive about it.
•	 You notice that a 14-year-old boy has begun to engage in risky behaviour   
 compared to his classmates. You catch him in the schoolyard one day smoking  
 a cigarette.
90
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Ask them how they would respond to this child. What might they do to help this 
young person address their issue(s)? Would they respond differently if  the child were a 
member of  the opposite sex than the one in their scenario? 
Ask Student Teachers to keep their responses in their journals or with their notes and 
look at them as the unit continues to check if  their ideas change during the unit. 
Summary (5–10 minutes) 
Point out that some critics of  adolescent development theory suggest that the idea of  
adolescence is a social construction and very Western. It is a more common in affluent 
societies where people between 14 and 19 have the leisure to live without having to 
support themselves and their families and have the opportunity for continued education.
In earlier times, and in Pakistani society even today , societies did not mark out ado-
lescence as [a] distinct time of  life. People simply moved from childhood into young 
adulthood with no stopover in between. See:
 Ø http://free-books-online.org/mix-books/introduction-to-sociology/
socialization-and-the-life-course
Challenge the group to look at the description of  physical development and critique 
it in light of  their own knowledge of  Pakistani youth and the executive summary of  
‘ Adolescents and Youth in Pakistan 2001–2002’ in Faculty Resources. 
Ask: ‘What suggestions, if  any , do you have for the lists under “How do these changes 
affect teens?” and “What can you do?”’
Assignment
Complete the handout ‘Beliefs about Adolescents’ and read ‘What Studies of  
Adolescents Tell Us about Common Beliefs’.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
91
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Week 8, session 24: Social and emotional development I—
Erikson and development of self-identity
Looking ahead
If  you select Option 1 for this session, you should also select Option 1 for the next 
session (Session 25: Social and emotional development II: The adolescent peer group).
Option 1
Review (10 minutes) 
Student Teachers should have a copy of  ‘Comparing Examples of  Developmental 
Theory’ from Unit 1. Ask them to bring it to class or distribute copies. Ask Student 
Teachers to do the following:
•	 Look at the ages 7–12 and 13–19 on the chart.
•	 Identify ways theorists describe it.
Active lecture (30 minutes) 
Prepare a lecture on Erikson and self-identity .
Also prepare a handout with a summary of  key points describing Erikson’s theory of  
identity development. 
Organize your lecture so that you can stop at two or three points to allow Student 
Teachers to fill in notes using the handout or compare notes.
Brainstorming (15 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to come up with five to ten ways children come to identify 
themselves as they reach adolescence (athlete, scientist, religious, ‘outsider’). Ask the 
following questions:
•	 What can the teacher do to encourage adolescents to engage in safe and enjoyable  
 activities, keeping in mind what you just learned? 
•	 What kind of  activities did you want to do most in your early teen years?
•	 What kind of  activities do you want to be identified with now?
Summary (5 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to summarize what they have learned in the session. Call for 
volunteers or call on those you want to encourage to participate.
Assignment 
Assign half  the class to read ‘Identity Formation in Adolescent Life’ and half  to 
read ‘Supporting Emotional Literacy’ from Faculty Resources. People are free to 
read both, but they will need to be prepared to be a resource person for the article 
92
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
assigned.Option 2
Small groups analyse scenarios (20 minutes)
Introduce the topic by giving one of  the vignettes below to half  the class and one to the oth-
er (or construct vignettes targeted to a situation your Student Teachers might encounter).
Rabiah is one of the better students in your class, but she seems to be misbehaving more 
and more. Last week, she tried playing football with some of the boys during recess. One 
of the teachers scolded her and told her she should be with the girls during this time and 
that she was only looking for attention. Then yesterday, the Social Studies teacher said she 
was worried because Rabiah is questioning some of the things she is learning. The Social 
Studies teacher sent Rabiah to the principal and her parents were notified.
•	 How would you have responded to Rabiah in each of  these situations?
•	 Keeping in mind some of  the things we’ve talked about, recommend a   
 course of  action for the teacher to take (if  any) regarding Rabiah. 
Saleem seems to always be getting angry and losing his temper. The boys were getting 
ready to start a cricket game, and when he couldn’t be first he started shoving other boys. 
When you try to talk with him, he just looks down and shrugs his shoulders. Another time you 
handed out tests that you had graded and when he saw that he did not get a perfect score, 
he wadded up the paper and threw it in the trash. Then today, you learned that when he was 
in maths class, another boy laughed at him, and Saleem got up and hit him in the face.
•	 What can you do about Saleem’s angry behaviour?
•	 Taking into account some of  the things we’ve talked about, recommend a   
 course of  action for the teacher to take (if  any) regarding Saleem. 
Have pairs read the vignette and try to answer the questions.
Reading groups (30 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to form small groups of  four or five based on their scenario. 
Make sure there is someone in each group who feels comfortable reading English. 
Give one of  the articles from Faculty Resources to each group. Give the Rabiah 
groups ‘Identity Formation in Adolescent Life’. Give the Saleem groups ‘Supporting 
Emotional Literacy’.
Ask the groups to read the article together and then look at their case study again to 
learn if  there is additional information that might assist them.
Observe each group’s discussion and correct any misconceptions.
Mini-lecture (10 minutes) 
Go over key points in Erikson’s theory of  identity formation and connect it to the two cases.
Assignment (5 minutes) 
Ask the Student Teachers to read the article that was handed to the other half  of  the class.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
93
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Week 9, session 25: Social and emotional development II— 
The adolescent peer group
Note: Use Option 1 in this session if  you used Option 1 in the previous session, Session 25.
Option 1
Assignment 
Prior to class, assign ‘The Adolescent Peer Group: A Problem or Necessity?’ in Faculty 
Resources.
Brainstorming about peer influence (15 minutes)
Tell the class that when you give them the following phrases, they should write down 
their first thought:
•	 Favourite kind of  music
•	 Favourite musical group
•	 Favourite singer
•	 Favourite film
•	 Favourite actor
•	 Favourite way of  dressing
•	 Favourite things to do 
Ask them to move about the room and find as many people as they can in five min-
utes who have the same favourites that they do. Ask them to note down the names of  
people who have the same favourites. 
Keep track of  time.
Quickly survey by asking Student Teachers to raise their hands to find out who got 
the most for each item. Who and what is the favourite and how many agreed? Ask: 
•	 ‘How much do you think your ideas have been influenced by peers?’ Take as   
 many responses as time permits.
•	 ‘What favourites are influenced by culture?’ Take as many responses as time permits.
Mini-lecture (20 minutes) 
You may want to review ‘ Adolescence: A Social Construct?’ and ‘Key Points 
in Adolescent Development’ in Faculty Resources  in preparing notes for the 
mini-lecture. At the end of  the lecture or at points during the lecture, ask Student 
Teachers to discuss:
•	 The role of  peers. (Note differences of  opinion about the influence of  peer   
 groups in different cultural contexts.)
•	 Prosocial and aggressive behaviour in teens.
•	 The implication for teachers.
94
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Pair work (20 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to form pairs. Hand out ‘The Adolescent Peer Group: A 
Problem or Necessity?’ from Faculty Resources. Ask them to do the following:
•	 Think of  examples of  peer group influence they have observed in classrooms,  
 from among younger adolescents they know , and their own experiences.
•	 Discuss pros and cons of  peer group formation. Are they different for boys and girls?
Summary (5 minutes) 
Summarize key points discussed in the session and respond to any questions.
Option 2
Rethinking scenarios (5 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to return to the groups they were in during the previous session 
when they discussed the vignettes of  Rabiah and Saleem. Ask them to keep their 
vignette in mind during the lecture as they will be applying new information to their 
discussion of  the two vignettes.
Active lecture (40 minutes)
You may want to review ‘ Adolescence: A Social Construct?’ and ‘Key Points in Adolescent 
Development’ in Faculty Resources. Ask Student Teachers to discuss the following:
•	 The role of  peers. Note differences of  opinion about the influence of  peer   
 groups in different cultural contexts.
•	 The place of  peer groups in Pakistani culture, urban culture, rural culture,   
 ethnic group, and minority culture.
•	 Pro-social and aggressive behaviour in teens.
•	 The implications for teachers.
Chunk information into 10-minute segments and give Student Teachers an opportunity 
to compare notes following each.
Rethinking scenarios (15 minutes)
Have Student Teachers rethink their cases now that they have the information from 
the lecture. Ask them to consider: 
•	 How might peer pressure be influencing Rabiah or Saleem?
•	 How might peer influence be used in a positive way?
•	 Would it make a difference if  you knew Rabiah or Saleem were members of  a  
 minority group? What would you do as teacher?
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
95
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Week 9, session 26: Social and emotional  
development III—Motivation and self-regulation
In advance of  both options, prepare a handout about strategies for ‘Fostering 
Motivation in the Classroom’ to distribute at the end of  the mini-lecture. Use the 
resources for Unit 4 in Faculty Resources for ideas and your own experience to help 
make the handout. 
Option 1
Small groups analyse scenarios (20 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to organize into small groups. (When organizing small groups, 
make sure group membership varies so they have an opportunity to work with 
different peers.)
Hand out ‘ Adolescent Motivation: Student Scenarios’ from Faculty Resources.
Assign one of  the scenarios to each group.
Ask them to brainstorm about clues that might help them work with the child 
described, based on what they know about adolescent development. Ask: ‘What might 
be plausible reasons for the behaviour?’
Mini-lecture (15 minutes) 
Point out, in reference to the scenarios, that we cannot always know what causes 
behaviour that we see in children. We have to think about how to help them become 
more effective even when we are not sure why they are acting as they do. 
Summarize key points about motivating adolescents and how to help them become 
more self-regulating.
Scenario group work (15 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers:
•	 Use the ‘Fostering Motivation in the Classroom’ handout to consider the   
 scenario assigned. What strategies might you use with your scenario?
•	 Is the behaviour the students exhibit necessarily negative? What kind of    
 encouragement would you provide to make sure the student remains (or   
 becomes) engaged in school?
Summary discussion (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers:
•	 What did they find challenging about dealing with the scenarios?
•	 What insights did they gain from the exercise?
96
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Option 2
Mini-lecture (15 minutes) 
Prepare and share a mini-lecture about motivation and self-regulation. Point out, in 
reference to the scenarios, that we cannot always know what causes behaviour that we 
see in children. We have to think about how to help them become more effective even 
when we are not sure why they are acting as they do. 
Summarize key points about motivating adolescents and how to help them become 
more self-regulating.
Guided pair work (45 minutes)
Read each of  the following descriptions in turn. Ask Student Teachers to use the hand-
out about ‘Fostering Motivation in the Classroom’ and write down one or two ideas 
about how they might motivate the student. 
Try the first one together as a whole class:
•	 ‘You have a 12-year-old girl in class who constantly needs to be the centre of    
 attention. She is constantly around her peers and is often seen as the leader’.
Ask pairs to share ideas they have for working with the student. Ask probing questions 
to help them evaluate their ideas. 
Then ask pairs to read each of  the following, give time for pair discussion, and elicit 
ideas from Student Teachers as time permits. 
•	 You have an 11-year-old boy who doesn’t associate much with his peers, and he  
 is often picked on. He always seems to follow you around, trying to impress   
 you with his knowledge and generally showing off.
•	 You have a very competitive 14-year-old boy in your class. He always raises his  
 hand and often answers questions in class without being called on. He is very   
 eager to contribute and at times even seems to get bored with the class.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
97
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Week 9, session 27: Cognitive and linguistic  
development I—Piaget 
Option 1
Concept attainment (30 minutes)
Engage Student Teachers in this activity to help them think about the concept of  ado-
lescent cognitive development. Student Teachers are asked to think about attributes 
that can be used to say if  something is an example or not an example, and to begin to 
identify and clarify properties of  the concept. 
Create a poster or write headings on the chalk/whiteboard that read ‘Positive Examples’ 
and ‘Negative Examples’.
Put two words on the chart or board: generalize and eating. Ask Student Teachers to 
look at the two words.
Explain: ‘Generalize belongs in a category we are going to think about. Eating does not. 
As we go through the exercise, I want you to try to decide what the category is that 
we will be thinking about’.
Add the next two words: symbols and clouds. 
Say: ‘Look at this pair of  words. Symbols is part of  the category we are thinking about, 
clouds is not. What do generalize and symbols have in common that eating and clouds do 
not? Think about it’.
Continue by adding the next two sets of  words, pausing after each: logical and cricket, 
future and sounds. 
Ask: ‘Now what are you thinking? Please write down a hypothesis about what the 
category is that we are going to be working with. Think about what the positive 
examples have in common that they do not share with the negative examples’.
Present the next positive example (on a paper or write to the side of  the lists): logical. 
Ask: ‘Based on your hypothesis, should this be a positive example or a negative exam-
ple?’ Ask for a show of  hands.
Go on to give the next few words or phrases, but not in pairs. Have Student Teachers 
tell you which category they go in: future, reason, cricket, sounds, orange, concrete think-
ing, abstract thinking, club, school, and intelligence.
When most of  the class seem to be able to put things in the right category , ask them 
if  they will share their hypothesis about the concept you are looking for. If  they are 
incorrect, give them some more words and have them place these in categories.
After you have added these, ask if  someone can give you a positive example. If  it is an 
attribute of  adolescent cognitive development, accept it.
98
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
If  you work through all of  the words without anyone guessing, ask them to think of  
what these words are characteristic of. For example, if  they guess thinking, help them 
see that concrete thinking and abstract thinking describe different kinds of  thinking, and 
that the concept these are linked to is ‘adolescent development’. This activity should 
not take too much time.
Positive Examples Negative Examples
Generalize Eating
Symbols Clouds
Logical Cricket
Future Sounds
Reason Orange
Abstract thinking Club
Intelligence School
Think Potato chip
Rational Wind
Reflect Dupata
Mental Rubbish 
Problem-solving Lunch
Judgment Film
Knowledge Singing
Mind Raindrop
Thought Play
Form hypotheses Concrete thinking
Formal operations Conservation
13–19-year-olds Semi-concrete thinking
Pair reading (20 minutes)
Hand out ‘Cognitive Development of  Adolescents’ from Faculty Resources.
Summary (10 minutes)
Summarize key concepts about adolescent cognitive development. Note the contrast-
ing perspectives of  Piaget and Vygotsky brought out in the reading.
Assignment 
Ask Student Teachers to read ‘Gender Differences in Adolescent Development’ in 
Faculty Resources. Ask them to try out the task with a friend.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
99
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Option 2
Use information in Faculty Resources to prepare a handout on ‘Similarities and 
Differences between Piaget and Vygotsky’ and another on ‘Teaching Strategies’.
Lecture (20 minutes)
In the lecture, summarize adolescent cognitive development and offer contrasting 
views. Hand out note cards or slips of  paper and ask Student Teachers to write down 
questions they have during the lecture.
Question and answer (10 minutes)
Collect the questions. Answer each in turn, skipping those that are written illegibly or 
are duplicate.
Distribute the handout comparing Piaget and Vygotsky for Student Teachers to read 
later as a review .
Small group activity (20 minutes) 
Distribute the handout on teaching strategies. Ask groups to look at each one and talk 
about examples they have seen, if  any , in their classroom observations.
Discussion (10 minutes) 
Lead the class in discussing whether teachers use strategies listed on the handout, and 
ask why or why not. If  time permits, offer examples of  how these strategies are built 
into their course on child development.
Assignment
Ask Student Teachers to read ‘Gender Differences in Adolescent Development’ from 
Faculty Resources. Ask them to try out the task with a friend.
Lecture (20–25 minutes) 
See ‘Piaget’ in the ‘Essential Knowledge’ section of  the Course Guide. 
‘ Adolescent Brains Are Works in Progress’ is an interesting article that may be helpful.
 Ø www .pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/teenbrain/work/adolescent.html 
Week 10, session 28: Cognitive and linguistic  
development II— Vygotsky
Option 1
Mini-lecture (15 minutes)
Talk about Vygotsky’s theory of  linguistic learning. Include the concept of  scaffolding.
Small group design activity (25–30 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to form small groups of  three or four.
100
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Explain: ‘Imagine you are a secondary school Science, Literature, or Physical Education 
Instructor. With Vygotsky’s theory in mind, design an age-appropriate scaffolding task 
for students, with the idea that they should work collaboratively but the teacher will be 
looked to extensively for guidance. Be prepared to share your design’.
Ambassadors (15 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to combine with another group of  three or four. Tell them to 
take turns sharing what they designed.
Option 2
Guest speaker
Invite another faculty member or someone you know who is an expert/guest speaker 
in language development. Ask that person to give a 30-minute presentation on language 
development in adolescence and the challenges of  adolescent second-language learners. 
Ask the expert activity (15–20 minutes)
Arrange two chairs facing another chair at the front of  the room.
Give everyone an opportunity to write down a question they have for the ‘expert’ on a 
strip of  paper. Ask two volunteers to take turn writing answers to the questions as they 
are asked. Provide these volunteers with a stack of  recycled paper and markers to use.
Choose two people with questions to sit in the two chairs facing the expert/guest 
speaker, who is invited to sit in the chair opposite. 
The person in chair one reads his or her question and hands it to the speaker.
As the speaker answers it, one of  the volunteers writes the answer and hands it to the 
person in the chair one who asked the question. 
The person in chair one takes the question back from the speaker and posts it along 
with the answer on the wall or a display board.
The person in chair two moves to chair one and the Instructor chooses someone to sit in 
chair two and be ready to ask his or her question. Continue as long as there are questions.
After the questions have been answered, give the speaker a minute to make any 
additional comments.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
101
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Week 10, session 29: Cognitive and individual differences
Option 1
Brainstorming and gallery walk (15 minutes)
Have Student Teachers work in small groups of  four or five.
Ask them to use chart paper to make a list of  all the ways members of  their group are 
different that they can think of  in five minutes. 
Post the lists and let other people look at the posted lists as time permits.
Small groups, reading (30 minutes)
Raise the question: ‘Do the ways we measure intelligence allow for differences?’
Hand out ‘Measuring Intelligence’. Have Student Teachers read and discuss the 
reading in groups.
Ask them to critique existing methods of  measuring intelligence in adolescents, 
following the questions in the handout.
Class discussion (15 minutes) 
Ask the groups to report on their answers. Ask each group to report on one question 
before moving to the next.
Option 2
Assignment 
Prior to class, ask each Student Teacher observing in an adolescent class to get permis-
sion from the teacher to bring samples of  adolescent student work taken from 5 to 10 
students that were tasked with the same assignment. Explain to Student Teachers that 
the purpose will be to review them in the course class to better understand differences 
in student development. The work samples can be returned if  the teacher wishes. 
Label the sample with the name of  the school and class. Cover the name. Provide an 
explanation of  what the assignment was for each set of  papers.
Analysing work samples (20 minutes) 
Place Student Teachers in small groups of  four or five.
Ask Student Teachers to share the work samples they have brought. Divide them up so that 
each table has a set of  at least three or four papers for the same assignment to examine.
Have Student Teachers look at the work and answer the following questions:
•	 What differences do you see in the work?
•	 What does the work tell you about individual differences?
•	 What does it tell you about adolescent thinking?
•	 What do the papers not tell you that you might need to know to assess   
 cognitive ability?
102
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Mini-lecture (15 minutes) 
Talk about how intelligence is measured and problems with IQ tests.
Whole group discussion (10–15 minutes) 
Lead the class in thinking about the questions raised during their analysis of  the 
adolescent student’s work.
Ask: ‘What kinds of  information might you collect in order to develop a good picture 
of  a adolescents’ cognitive development?’
Week 10, session 30: Conclusion and review 
Option 1
Cognitive mapping (20–30 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to form pairs. Ask them to go through their notes and draw 
cognitive maps to relate the different topics discussed during the unit on adolescence. 
Post maps on a wall or in a display area.
Gallery walk (20 minutes)
Ask one member of  the pair to stay with the map and explain it to visitors. After 10 
minutes switch so that the second member stays with the map and the first makes the 
gallery walk.
Summary (10 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to summarize what they learned during the gallery walk. 
Support or prompt them where necessary to ensure that they touch on the various 
topics covered during the unit on adolescence. 
Option 2
Pairs write advice to teachers (40 minutes)
Instruct Student Teachers: ‘Based on what you have learned in this unit, write a letter 
to a hypothetical new teacher explaining key things about adolescents that they should 
know to be an effective teacher. Consider the whole child. Use your notes as you need’.
Sharing letters (10 minutes)
Pairs meet with another pair to read their letters to each other.
Summary (10 minutes) 
Select one or two letters at random and ask Student Teachers to read them aloud to 
the class.
Summarize key points about adolescent development that may not be in the letters.
 UNIT     5  DIFFERENCES IN CLASSROOMS:
 DEVELOPMENTAL VARIATION 
 AND SPECIAL NEEDS
104
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Overview 
In this unit, Student Teachers will examine learning differences, both normal variation 
in learning styles and disabilities and disorders. Student Teachers will consider the role 
of  the school and the Instructor in managing and accommodating learning differences 
in classroom practice. Student Teachers will additionally consider the strategies 
employed in national educational policy in Pakistan on accommodating diverse 
developmental needs.
Week # T opics/themes
11
Differences in student learning and performance strengths
Child development review I
Child development review II
12
Recognizing disability and learning disorders I: Emotional 
and behavioural
Recognizing disability and learning disorders II: Language, 
physical, and sensory
Cognitive differences: Delays and giftedness
13
Addressing special needs in the classroom: Differentiated 
instruction
School resources and support services for special-needs 
students
Reflection and review
Learning goals 
 l demonstrate an understanding of  children’s differences in learning styles   
 and capacities
 l recognize and categorize signs of  developmental delays, disorders, and disabilities
 l demonstrate awareness of  the social perceptions of  difference
 l consider classroom needs from various perspectives, including those of  children   
 and teachers
 l recognize the strengths that each child brings to the classroom
 l identify factors that influence learning differences and special needs.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
105
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Essential questions
•	 How can schools best accommodate different learning needs?
•	 How can teachers use benchmarks for development without seeing children of   
 difference as abnormal?
•	 What is the role of  the school in accommodating children with special needs?
Enduring understandings
•	 Variation among children’s learning abilities and learning strengths is normal.
•	 Teachers can work to accommodate different learning abilities and disabilities  
 in the classroom in a variety of  ways.
Additional resources
P . Asherson, ‘ADHD and Genetics’. In R. E. Tremblay , R. G. Barr, and R. DeV . Peters 
(eds.), Encyclopedia on Early Childhood Development (Montreal: Centre of  Excellence for 
Early Childhood Development, 2010).
 Ø http://www .child-encyclopedia.com/pages/PDF/AshersonANGxp.pdf
 Ø http://www .child-encyclopedia.com/en-ca/home.html
‘ Autism’, Encyclopedia on Early Childhood Development. 
 Ø http://www .child-encyclopedia.com/pages/PDF/autism.pdf  
J. Beitchman and E. Brownlie, ‘Language Development and Its Impact on Children’s 
Psychosocial and Emotional Development’. In R. E. Tremblay , R. G. Barr, and R. DeV . 
Peters (eds.), Encyclopedia on Early Childhood Development (Montreal: Centre of  
Excellence for Early Childhood Development, 2010). 
 Ø http://www .child-encyclopedia.com/documents/Beitchman-BrownlieANGxp_rev .pdf  
P . S. Dale and J. L. Patterson, ‘Early Identification of  Language Delay’. In R. E. Tremblay , 
R. G. Barr, and R. DeV . Peters (eds.), Encyclopedia on Early Childhood Development 
(Montreal: Centre of  Excellence for Early Childhood Development, 2009). 
 Ø http://www .child-encyclopedia.com/documents/Dale-PattersonANGxp-
Language.pdf  
D. Dickinson, ‘Learning through Many Kinds of  Intelligences’, Pakistan: Aga Khan 
Foundation.
 Ø http://www .ecdpak.com/Child-Centered-Classroom/Learning/Learning-
through-Many-Intelligence.pdf
Mayada Elsabbagh and M. E. Clarke (eds.), ‘Autism: Synthesis’. Encyclopedia on Early 
Childhood Development (2006), i–iii. 
 Ø http://www .child-encyclopedia.com/pages/PDF/autism.pdf  
106
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
T . H. Gardner, H. and T . Hatch, ‘Educational Implications of  the Theory of  Multiple 
Intelligences’. Educational Researcher, 18(8), 4-10. (1989). 
Ø http://www .jstor.org/stable/1176460. 
Japan International Cooperation Agency . ‘Country Profile on Disability: Islamic Republic 
of  Pakistan’. 2002.
Ø http://siteresources.worldbank.org/DISABILITY/Resources/Regions/South%20
Asia/JICA_Pakistan.pdf‘
Learning Disabilities’, Encyclopedia on Early Childhood Development. 
Ø http://www .child-encyclopedia.com/pages/PDF/learning-disabilities.pdf  
E. Mays, ‘Developing Multiple Intelligences in Children’, Nurture: Pakistan’s Pioneer 
Publication on Early Childhood Development, 8. 
Ø http://www .ecdpak.com/nurture/Nurture-8/developing_multiple_intelligenc-
es_in_children.html 
Ministry of  Education. ‘The Development of  Education: National Report of  Pakistan’ 
(Islamabad: Ministry of  Education, 2004). 
Ø http://www .ibe.unesco.org/International/ICE47/English/Natreps/reports/
pakistan.pdf  
N. Rommelse, ‘Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Cognition’. In R. E. Tremblay , 
R. G. Barr, and R. DeV . Peters (eds.), Encyclopedia on Early Childhood Development 
(Montreal: Centre of  Excellence for Early Childhood Development, 2010). 
Ø http://www .child-encyclopedia.com/documents/RommelseANGxp.pdf  
R. Tannock, ‘Language Development and Literacy: Comments on Beitchman and Cohen’. In 
R. E. Tremblay , R. G. Barr, and R. DeV . Peters (eds.), Encyclopedia on Early Childhood 
Development (Montreal: Centre of  Excellence for Early Childhood Development, 2010). 
Ø http://www .child-encyclopedia.com/documents/TannockANGxp.pdf  
C. Tomlinson, The Differentiated Classroom: Responding to the Needs of  All Learners 
(Alexandria, V A: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development, 1999). 
Available as an e-book at: 
Ø http://educat.tc.columbia.edu/search/t?SEARCH=The+Differentiated+Class-
room%3A+Responding+to+the+Needs+of+All+Learners
UNICEF , ‘Pakistan: Examples of  Inclusive Education’ (Kathmandu: UNICEF , 2003). 
Ø http://www .unicef.org/rosa/InclusivePak.pdf
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
107
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Resources for this unit in Faculty Resources
Student T eacher readings
‘Classrooms for All Learners’ 
‘What a Child Can Do’
‘Models of  Disability’
‘ Autism’
‘ ADHD Children and Classroom Management’
‘Understanding the Nature of  Learning Disorders in Pakistani Classrooms’
‘What Do Gifted Children Need?’
‘Differentiated Instruction in the Inclusive Classroom’
‘Looking at Social Issues Holistically: The Rejected Child’
Faculty resources
‘Inclusive Education in Pakistan?’
 ‘Social Tasks Involved in Peer Relationships’
‘Developing Multiple Intelligences in Children’
‘General Categories of  Learning Disability’
‘Meeting the Needs of  Students With Cognitive Delay’
‘Characteristics of  Gifted Children’
‘Characteristics of  Gifted and Talented Children: Check-list’
‘Case Studies of  Working Models of  Inclusive Education in Pakistan’
Unit 5: Session planning guide
Week 11, session 31: Differences in student learning and 
performance strengths
Option 1
Assignment 
Prior to class, have Student Teachers read ‘Understanding the Nature of  Learning 
Disorders in Pakistani Classrooms’.
Introduction to the new unit (10 minutes)
Comment on the following:
•	 The course until this point has been describing typical child development.   
 A range of  behaviours and aspects of  cognitive, social, emotional, and physical  
 development have been presented characterizing what many people think of  as  
 normal development. 
•	 We need to question what is actually normal, as everyone has differences.
•	 Real classrooms are full of  very different children—children who have varied   
 strengths in and out of  the classroom and some who have special needs. 
•	 This unit will cover ways in which learners differ and how schools can   
 accommodate these differences.
108
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Reflection (5 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to reflect on their classroom observations. Ask the following 
questions:
•	 Have you seen evidence for the idea that children approach learning differently?
•	 What are some of  the strengths and weaknesses of  particular children you have  
 observed in the classroom?
Pair work (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to share their reflections with each other. Then ask them to 
brainstorm categories of  differences that they have witnessed in the classroom. 
Active lecture (40 minutes) 
Begin by taking two minutes to ask Student Teachers to name some of  the differ-
ences they have noticed. Alternatively , you may also want to use the quotation that 
introduces the reading ‘What a Child Can Do’ to initiate the lecture and give Student 
Teachers a minute to consider it. You might also want to include the following points. 
Special needs are commonly defined by what a child cannot do—by milestones unmet, 
foods banned, activities avoided, experiences denied. These minuses hit families hard, 
and may make special needs seem like a tragic designation. Some parents will always 
mourn their child’s lost potential, and many conditions become more troubling with 
time. Other families may find that their child’s challenges make triumphs sweeter, and 
that weaknesses are often accompanied by amazing strengths.
Note the history of  special education in Pakistan.
Set out some of  the learning differences and disabilities that are encountered in 
classrooms in Pakistan (issues of  diversity will be covered in Unit 6).
Pause after every 10 or 15 minutes to give Student Teachers an opportunity to com-
pare notes or ask questions.
Minute paper (5 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to write a reaction to the lecture for one minute. At the end of  
one minute, ask the following questions:
•	 Do you think teachers in the classrooms where you have observed are comfortable  
 working with children with different learning needs?
•	 How comfortable do you think you will feel when working with children with  
 different learning needs?
•	 What would be necessary to make you feel comfortable?
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
109
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Option 2
Introduction to the new unit (5 minutes)
Comment on the following:
•	 The course until this point has been describing typical child development.   
 A range of  behaviours and aspects of  cognitive, social, emotional, and physical  
 development have been presented characterizing what many people think of  as  
 normal development. 
•	 We need to challenge what is actually normal, as everyone has differences.
•	 Real classrooms are full of  very different children—children who have varied   
 strengths in and out of  the classroom and some who have special needs. 
•	 This unit will cover ways in which learners differ and ways schools can   
 accommodate these differences.
Text-against-text (45 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to form groups of  six.
Hand out a text set with ‘What a Child Can Do’ and ‘Inclusive Education in Pakistan?’ 
from Faculty Resources or two other short articles of  your choice that address spe-
cial-needs issues.
Ask three members (half  the group) to read one article and half  the other article. Be 
available to assist with English or difficult concepts. Answer the following questions 
about their article:
•	 What is the main purpose or the article?
•	 What is the point of  view of  the author or authors?
•	 Do the ideas in the article address any issues you have experienced as a child or  
 when observing in classrooms?
•	 Who should read this article?
Ask each half  of  the group to report on its article to the next group.
Ask the group to think of  the two articles together and consider the following questions:
•	 What might the author of  ‘What a Child Can Do’ say to the author of    
 ‘Inclusive Education in Pakistan?’ (and the reverse).
•	 Look at the list of  kinds of  special needs in ‘What a Child Can Do’. How   
 feasible would it be to mainstream children with the differences mentioned?
•	 What kinds of  strengths do you think the author had in mind in the first   
 paragraph of  ‘What a Child Can Do?’ What strengths might a child with   
 special needs bring to the classroom?
110
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Reflection (10–15 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers for the insights they have gained from comparing the readings 
and for any lingering questions. (These may not have answers.) 
Personal reflection (5 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to reflect on the ways they have seen schools manage differenc-
es in children’s learning. 
Week 11, session 32: Child development review I
The next two sessions should involve Student Teachers going deeper into child devel-
opment, looking at the span from preschool through middle school. The focus is on 
helping Student Teachers understand how this knowledge will help them as teachers 
of  children at any age and help them to identify children who may have special needs.
Note that an alternative to this session is provided at the end of  Unit 5; that session 
covers Gardner’s theories in more depth.
Option 1
Assignment 
Prior to class, ask Student Teachers to read ‘Looking at Social Issues Holistically’ and 
to think about the questions. 
Discussion of article (15 minutes) 
Lead the class in discussing the assigned article. Ask the Student Teachers to leave 
aside the case of  Shakeel and think about the argument the article makes. Ask the 
following questions:
•	 What questions does the article raise?
•	 Have you seen instances in classrooms where you are observing where children’s  
 behaviour is a problem that may be masking larger issues?
Case scenario (20 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to meet in small groups to discuss Shakeel. They should use the 
discussion questions below to further extend their thinking about the article.
•	 Ask them to identify steps they would take as Shakeel’s teacher. 
•	 Ask them to use their knowledge of  child development to justify their choices.
Tell them to be prepared to share their proposed steps and justification with the whole class.
Group reporting (25 minutes)
Each group has about five minutes to share steps and justification. Following each 
group presentation, raise questions to help sharpen their thinking about development.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
111
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Assignment
Have Student Teachers write a one-page description of  a child they know (this could 
be their child study subject if  they are doing a child study over the semester) and bring 
it to class. Ask them to bring their notes from the study of  child development from 
preschool through adolescence.
Option 2
Assignment 
Prior to class, ask the Student Teachers to bring their notes from the study of  child 
development from preschool through adolescence to class. 
Reflection (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to take five minutes to write about the age group they most want 
to teach and why . They may write this in their journals or on a separate piece of  paper. 
Ask: ‘What is it about child development at this age that you find most interesting?’
Ask Student Teachers to take five minutes to write about the age group they least 
want to work and why . 
Ask: ‘What is it about child development at this age that makes you less interested in 
working with children of  this age?’
Small groups review development (40 minutes)
Organize groups according to age group they most want to teach. Keep groups at five 
or six maximum. If  there is an age group that is not represented, leave it out for the 
present. Go with their choices.
Using their notes, have small groups meet and design a large graphic organizer on 
chart or poster paper, ‘Meet the ___ [age group] child’. Ask them to do the following: 
•	 List developmental characteristics that have been studied in class, such as   
 physical and emotional characteristics, in the centre of  the chart.
•	 List developmental characteristics that precede and follow on the right-hand   
 side of  the display .
Encourage creativity but not at the expense of  substance.
Move about during the activity to encourage all group members to share in the work. 
If  they are unable to finish during the class time allotted, ask the group to arrange to 
meet outside of  class to complete the chart.
Gallery walk and summary (10 minutes)
Encourage Student Teachers to visit each other’s displays (including those in progress).
Assignment 
Ask Student Teachers to read ‘Looking at Social Issues Holistically’ and think about 
the questions. 
112
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 11, session 33: Child development review II
Note: An alternative to this session is provided at the end of  this unit.
Use Option 1 here if  you used Option 1 in Session 32. Use Option 2 if  you used 
Option 2 in Session 32.
Option 1 
Lecture (20 minutes)
Cover key points about development that you feel Student Teachers may have difficulty 
understanding or correct misconceptions you have observed during their group work.
Small group work (40 minutes)
Group Student Teachers by the age of  the child they wrote about in their assignment 
for this session. (Groups should be no larger than six.)
Give each group large poster board or cardboard to create a map of  an age-appropri-
ate classroom environment. Ask them to keep in mind the following:
•	 Would this be a good environment for the child you have described?
•	 The article ‘Looking at Social Issues Holistically’.
•	 Your notes on child development.
Ask them to consider these questions as they complete their designs:
•	 How will your classroom allow for differences in learning, physical abilities, and  
 emotional needs?
•	 What theorists can you use to defend your choices about what is age appropriate?
At the end of  20 minutes, have two members from each group visit another group to 
observe and ask questions about the choices they made in setting up the environment.
At the end of  30 minutes, have visiting members return to their groups. Send another 
two members to another group to observe and question. 
Circulate to observe, question, critique, and correct misconceptions. 
Option 2 
Using the displays (5 minutes)
Place the displays of  ‘Meet the Child’ where Student Teachers can see and refer to them.
Ask for two volunteers to be a ‘point person’ for each age-group display . Put their 
names on the board.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
113
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Small group work: Planning a classroom environment (40 minutes)
Organize small groups of  no more than five Student Teachers according to the age 
group they wrote about that they least wanted to teach or age groups that were not 
represented in the displays made last session.
Point people will work with a group, but they may be called upon by another group 
to give advice or critique from time to time.
Explain the following: ‘ Assume that you are assigned to teach the age group that you 
least wanted to teach. Set up an age-appropriate classroom environment for this group’.
Give each group large poster board or cardboard. Ask them to keep in mind the following:
•	 The article ‘Looking at Social Issues Holistically’.
•	 Their notes on child development.
•	 Children of  all ages need environments that encourage active learning.
Remind them to consider these questions as they complete their designs:
•	 How will your classroom allow for differences in learning, physical abilities, and  
 emotional needs?
•	 What theorists can you use to defend your choices about what is age appropriate?
At the end of  20 minutes, have two members from each group visit another group to 
observe and ask questions about the choices they made in setting up the environment.
At the end of  30 minutes, have visiting members return to their groups. Send another 
two members to another group to observe and question. 
Circulate to observe, question, critique, and correct misconceptions.
Reflection (10–15 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to think about the task they have just completed. Ask the 
following questions:
•	 What did you find most challenging about this task?
•	 Why might it be important to be able to set up a classroom environment for   
 any age group?
•	 What developmental needs do all children seem to share in common?
•	 What developmental needs seem more age related?
114
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 12, session 34: Recognizing disability and learning 
disorders I —Emotional and behavioural
Suggested reading for Student Teachers, for both options: 
•	 ‘ Autism’, in Faculty Resources.
•	 ‘ ADHD and Classroom Management’, in Faculty Resources.
Option 1
KWL (5 minutes) 
Have Student Teachers do a KWL about recognizing disability . They may want to 
keep it in their journal or use it to take notes during the lecture.
KWL is a strategy that provides a structure for recalling what students know about 
a topic, noting what students want to know , and finally listing what has already been 
learned and is yet to be learned.
The KWL strategy allows students to take inventory of  what they already know and 
what they want to know . Students can categorize information about the topic that 
they expect to use as they progress through a lesson or unit.
Active lecture (50 minutes) 
Present definitions of  disability . (You might want to have short definitions and a 
summary of  more extensive definitions on a handout to guide listening.)
Following definitions, have Student Teachers pair-share on the definitions they prefer 
and why .
Hand out two definitions of  disability offered in ‘Country Profile on Disability: 
Islamic Republic of  Pakistan’. The document is available at: 
 Ø http://siteresources.worldbank.org/DISABILITY/Resources/Regions/South%20
Asia/JICA_Pakistan.pdf
Explain to Student Teachers that while all children have unique needs, certain children 
have more consistent ones. These special-needs students may include those with disabilities 
or learning disorders. The types of  disabilities discussed in this class are emotional and 
behavioural disabilities; language, physical and sensory disabilities; and cognitive differences. 
Remind Student Teachers that these divisions are artificial and there is a lot of  overlap 
among categories.
Pair-share at a stopping place in the lecture. Ask Student Teachers to think about their 
perceptions of  disability and share with a classmate. Ask them to consider some of  the 
attitudes toward disability they have seen evidenced in the classroom.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
115
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Present the two prominent models of  disability: medical and social. (See ‘Models 
of  Disability’ in Faculty Resources; you may wish to use this as a reading assignment 
before or following class.)
Present information on emotional and behavioural disorders, with particular empha-
sis on autism and ADD/ADHD.
Summary and reflection (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to add to the KWL they created before class.
Assignment 
There are several suggested readings in Faculty Resources. Choose those you think are 
most suitable for your group.
Option 2
Assignment 
Prior to class, assign half  the class the reading on ADHD/ADD and the other half  the 
reading on autism. Ask them to be prepared to share their reading with those who did 
not get a chance to read it.
Reflection (5 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers how students with special needs are perceived in Pakistani 
society and in the classroom. Student Teachers can draw on their own experience as 
students, as members of  society , and on their observations as Student Teachers.
Pair-work (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to discuss their answers in pairs and brainstorm general atti-
tudes held in their classrooms and social communities toward individuals with special 
needs. Ask them to discuss how their school experience may have been different if  
they had had special needs.
Mini-lecture, introduction (15 minutes)
Explain that while all children have unique needs, certain children have more consistent 
ones. These special-needs students may include those with disabilities or learning disorders. 
Point out that there are a variety of  different types of  disabilities and they will be 
discussed during this class as emotional and behavioural disabilities; language, physical 
and sensory disabilities; and cognitive differences. 
Explain that these barriers are artificial and there is a lot of  overlap among categories.
Present the two prominent models of  disability: medical and social (see ‘Models of  
Disability’ in Faculty Resources).
116
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Reading exchange (30 minutes)
Place Student Teachers in groups of  four or five according to the reading they completed.
Construct a list of  the essential points from the reading as well as questions and concerns.
Ask Student Teachers to pair with someone responsible for the other reading and to 
take turns sharing the major points, their own insights, and questions about autism 
and ADHD/ADD. 
 
Assignment
Prepare and distribute a handout for Student Teachers to think about:
•	 What similar challenges for teachers do the two disorders present? 
•	 What are some of  the differences? 
•	 What strengths might children with each disorder bring to the classroom?
•	 Do you think the readings reflect a more medical or social perspective on disability?
Week 12, session 35: Recognizing disability and learning 
disorders II—Language, physical, and sensory
Note for Option 1 and Option 2: ‘General Categories of  Learning Disability’ in 
Faculty Resources  may be useful for Student Teachers as a follow-up to the lecture. A 
list with technical labels for the Instructor is found under Additional Information at 
the end of  Unit 5.
Option 1
Assignment 
Prior to class, ask Student Teachers to read ‘Understanding the Nature of  Learning 
Disorders in Pakistani Classrooms’.
Review (5 minutes)
Review material on ADD/ADHD and autism. 
Introduce today’s topic and ask what characteristics of  ADD/ADHD align with this 
session’s topic on language, physical, and sensory disabilities.
Lecture (20 minutes)
Present information on language, physical, and sensory disabilities. Note how these 
disabilities may be seen in classrooms.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
117
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Reflections on classroom practice (15–20 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to reflect on the classroom they have been observing. Ask the 
following questions:
•	 What could the teacher do to accommodate children with language, physical,  
 or sensory disabilities? 
•	 Specifically , what adaptations could be made to one activity , lesson, or  
 the environment?
Ask Student Teachers to write a brief  description of  the adaptation they suggest. Ask 
them to think about the following:
•	 How can the adaptation build on children’s strengths while supporting   
 special needs?
•	 How does your adaptation include children so that they feel successful rather   
 than ‘singled out’?
Pair critiques (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to share their modified lessons in pairs and provide feedback. 
Incorporate this feedback into the revised activity description.
 
Summary and review (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to write three things they have learned, two that they would like to 
know more about, and one idea or skill they have mastered from the unit so far (3-2-1).
Summarize key points.
Option 2
Assignment 
Prior to class, ask Student Teachers to read ‘Understanding the Nature of  Learning 
Disorders in Pakistani Classrooms’ and bring it along with handouts or readings on 
ADD/ADHD to use in class.
Text-against-text (40 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to form small groups. Ask Student Teachers to imagine them-
selves as children in a classroom, with the following questions.
•	 If  they had ADD/ADHD, what challenges would they face in the classroom? 
•	 How would their experience be different from others? 
•	 Highlight key points in the handouts that inform your thinking.
After about 10 minutes, ask Student Teachers to review the article ‘Understanding 
the Nature of  Learning Disorders in Pakistani Classrooms’, asking the same 
questions as above.
118
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Active lecture (20 minutes)
Present information on language, physical, and sensory disabilities.
Pair-share (4–5 minutes) 
Pause about halfway through the lecture and ask what classroom modifications 
Student Teachers think the teacher would need to make for children with these 
disabilities. Ask them to talk with another Student Teacher about their ideas. 
At the end of  the lecture, challenge Student Teachers to continue thinking about how 
they would plan for children with so many different learning needs who might be in 
their classrooms.
Week 12, session 36: Cognitive differences—Delays 
and giftedness
Online resource: 
Encyclopedia on Early Childhood Development
 Ø http://www .child-encyclopedia.com/pages/PDF/learning-disabilities.pdf ) 
National Society for the Gifted and Talented (US) 
 Ø http://www .nsgt.org/articles/index.asp.
Option 1
Readers’ theatre (20 minutes)
Select key paragraphs about gifted and talented children from ‘What Do Gifted 
Children Need?’ in Faculty Resources. Give one to each of  several Student Teachers. 
Introduce the topic of  children with cognitive differences.
Ask Student Teachers to stand at the front of  the room or at their desks or tables to read 
aloud in turn. Have them pause for a moment after each reading to let their peers reflect.
Ask them what the cognitive difference is described by the readers. (The answer is 
giftedness or unusual talent.)
Give the list of  characteristics from ‘Meeting the Needs of  Students with Cognitive 
Delay’ to four readers. Have them take turns reading characteristics, pausing after 
each to let their peers reflect. 
Ask them what the cognitive difference is described by the readers. (The answer is 
cognitive delay .)
Point out that in this session, we will briefly look at needs of  these contrasting groups.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
119
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Active lecture (20 minutes)
Talk about cognitive delays and giftedness. 
Pause halfway through the lecture to give Student Teachers time to compare notes, or 
try another type of  active lecture.
Hand out three colours of  cards or slips of  paper. When Student Teachers are listen-
ing to your comments, ask them hold up a different colour that indicates:
•	 I understand. 
•	 I don’t understand.
•	 I disagree. 
Either stop and allow questions or adjust what you are saying so there are more 
‘understand’ colours showing. If  they disagree, give them an opportunity to explain 
the point of  disagreement.
Jigsaw (20 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to consider the ways in which children with cognitive difference 
are alike as they complete their part of  the jigsaw . 
Divide Student Teachers into small groups of  four or five.
Give half  of  the class the article ‘What Do Gifted Children Need?’ and the other half  
‘Meeting the Needs of  Students with Cognitive Delay’.
Ask Student Teachers to go over the article together and be prepared to share it with 
another group. 
Summarize key information and describe ways the article can be useful to teachers.
After 15 minutes, ask half  of  each group to trade places with a group who read the 
other article. Allow about five minutes for them to share.
Option 2
Pair discussion (5 minutes)
Ask pairs to think about the range of  cognitive or intellectual development they have 
seen in the classrooms where they are observing.
Whole-class anticipation guide (15 minutes)
‘ Anticipation guide’ is a strategy for reading and analysing what you think you already 
know . Students are presented with short, attention-grabbing statements. They decide 
whether or not they agree with the statements, pair up, and share their responses. 
Volunteers are asked to share whether or not they agreed. As they read the text, 
students are asked to determine if  their opinions matched the information in the text 
and to share amended responses after the reading.
120
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Create a handout using the characteristics list in two articles from Faculty Resources: ‘Meeting 
the Needs of  Students with Cognitive Delay’ and ‘What Do Gifted Children Need?’ 
Mix up the characteristics, such as: 
•	 Often such children are perfectionists. 
•	 These students may have weak problem-solving ability related to academics.
•	 These students can have low self-esteem due to repeated failure both socially   
 and academically .
Read each statement aloud and ask Student Teachers if  it is a characteristic of  stu-
dents with cognitive delay , gifted students, or both. 
Jigsaw (40 minutes)
Divide Student Teachers into small groups of  five or six. 
Give them no more than five minutes to compare their responses to statements in the 
previous exercise) of  other group members.
Give half  the class the article ‘Meeting the Needs of  Students with Cognitive Delay’ 
and the other half  ‘What Do Gifted Children Need?’
Ask them to go over the article together and be prepared to share it with another group. 
After 30 minutes, have half  of  each group exchange places with those from a group who 
read the other article. Allow Student Teachers about 10 minutes to share their responses.
Summary (if time permits)
Review any key points that you think may have been omitted in the readings or that 
Student Teachers seem to be missing in their text work.
Assignment 
Reflection essay: ask Student Teachers to take about 30 minutes to write on both of  
the following questions they will bring to class. 
•	 To what extent is it the school’s responsibility to accommodate children with   
 unique abilities? 
•	 Where should a teacher’s priority be in supporting children with different   
 cognitive abilities?
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
121
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Week 13, session 37: Addressing special needs in the 
classroom—Differentiated instruction 
Note: In advance of  both options for this session, ask Student Teachers to read 
‘Differentiated Instruction in the Inclusive Classroom’ in Faculty Resources.
Option 1
Case studies (50 minutes)
Assign groups one of  the four case studies described in ‘Case Studies of  Working 
Models of  Inclusive Education in Pakistan’ in Faculty Resources: the International 
School of  Studies, Karachi; Collegiate School System, Lahore; Parvarish School, 
Lahore; and Hassan Academy , Rawalpindi/Islamabad. All are attempting to build 
inclusive education programmes. 
Ask Student Teachers to take notes on the elements of  inclusive education seen in the 
case studies and what models or theories the elements might be drawing from. 
Ask the groups to share a few points with the class.
Assignment
Ask Student Teachers to consider the case they worked on in their group. Ask them to 
consider the following:
•	 Do they think that model would work in the classroom they are observing? 
•	 Why or why not?
They should use the questions to prepare a reflection in their journal or in a short paper.
Alternatively , ask Student Teachers to make a map of  an environment that would 
support active learning and differentiation.
Option 2
Presentation of case study (10 minutes)
Present one of  the case studies to the class.
Pair-share (15 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to discuss the following questions:
•	 Based on their reading of  ‘Differentiated Instruction in the Inclusive Classroom’,  
 what approaches to classroom instruction do they notice in the case study?
•	 Would that model work in the classroom you are working or observing in?   
 Why or why not?
Burning questions (5 minutes)
Give the class note cards or slips of  paper. Ask Student Teachers to think about one 
‘burning question’ (a very important, persistent question) about differentiated instruc-
tion and inclusive classrooms that they would like discussed in your lecture.
122
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Lecture (25 minutes)
Collect all the questions. Take a minute to organize them (if  you do this, ask Student 
Teachers to write on a separate paper—that they do not give you—two guesses to the 
answer to their question) or address them in the order they appear without repeating.
Ask Student Teachers to take turns writing down the answers to post on the graffiti wall.
Present information about different models of  instruction that target the diversity of  
needs as you answer questions. 
Review key concepts.
Discussion (5 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers how feasible they think differentiated instruction/inclusive 
education is in Pakistan outside of  private schools with multiple resources.
Week 13, session 38: School resources and support services 
for special-needs students
Class resource: pages 29–30 in ‘The Development of  Education: National Report of  
Pakistan’ (Islamabad: Ministry of  Education, 2004). 
 Ø http://www .ibe.unesco.org/International/ICE47/English/Natreps/reports/
pakistan.pdf  
Option 1
If  you have access to a computer lab, arrange to have the class meet there so that Student 
Teachers may use the computer to read the section of  the Ministry of  Education report on 
education and social inclusion. Alternatively , print copies of  this section of  the report so that 
there are enough for Student Teachers to share in groups of  two or three for this session.
Small group report analysis (40 minutes)
Form groups of  four to six; there should be at least two copies of  the report available.
Ask Student Teachers to examine Pakistani education policies for handling children 
with disabilities.
Ask Student Teachers to brainstorm the major points. Ask them what the implications 
of  this report are for:
•	 Colleges and universities with teacher education programs 
•	 Provincial governments
•	 Schools
•	 Teachers
If  you meet in a computer lab and small groups can share computers, ask them to 
search the report for information to aid in answering the implications as well as use 
their own judgment.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
123
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Group sharing and discussion (20 minutes)
Take ideas Student Teachers have about the implications of  the report, examining 
each in the order you prefer.
As you have the opportunity , discuss shifts in disability policy and their effect on education.
Ask Student Teachers if  any of  the policies described are visible in the classrooms they 
work in. Ask for an example. Take several if  they have seen examples.
Ask: ‘If  you could recommend one change in policy in the school where you are 
observing, what would it be? Why?’
Option 2
Mini-lecture (15 minutes)
Discusses shifts in disability policy and their effect on education.
Highlight the section on ‘Education and Social Inclusion’ from the Ministry of  
Education report of  2004 (see above).
Include major goals of  the new policies on education in regard to disability . 
Pair work (20 minutes)
If  the ‘Education and Social Inclusion’ section of  the report can be made available to 
Student Teachers, give a copy to pairs to analyse together. 
If  it isn’t possible to get the report, brainstorm with the class following the mini-lec-
ture to list major elements of  the education policy for students with special needs. List 
these on the board.
Ask Student Teachers to discuss the implications of  this report for:
•	 Colleges and universities with teacher education programs 
•	 Provincial governments
•	 Schools 
•	 Teachers
Group discussion (20 minutes)
Ask pairs to form small groups. Ask them to discuss the following and take notes in 
order to post on the graffiti wall:
•	 What are the implications of  the new policy? 
•	 Does the new policy imply any form of  instruction? If  so, what?
•	 Are any of  the policies described visible in the classroom you work in? If  so,   
 what are some examples?
124
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Based on their study of  differences in learning and new government policy , ask groups 
to come up with one recommendation for:
•	 Changes in schools
•	 Changes in classrooms
Have recorders post recommendations on the graffiti wall for others to see following 
class or before the next session.
Week 13, session 39: Reflection and review
Option 1
Assignment 
Prior to class, ask Student Teachers to review their notes and come prepared to 
explain the new policy and implications for how teachers will set up classrooms. They 
will use this in class.
Small group presentations (30 minutes)
Organize the class into small groups of  four to six. 
Ask each group to prepare a 15-minute presentation for parents at the beginning of  
the school year, based on the following scenario:
Your school has decided to implement new government policies regarding education 
and social inclusion. You are a committee of  teachers who have agreed to lead the 
way in setting up your classrooms for differentiated instruction. You know that chil-
dren assigned to your classroom include those with cognitive delay , physical disability , 
learning disability , and those who are gifted and talented, as well as other children.
You want parents to understand the new policy and why it should achieve a 
better education for all.
Decide which level of  education your class will be: preschool, primary , middle, 
or adolescent.
Include a map of  what your classroom will look like and other visuals.
Be prepared to present your information to another group. Everyone must be 
involved in preparation and presentation.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
125
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Presentations (30 minutes)
Pair groups so that each will be able to present to another group. Move about the 
classroom during the presentations.
Option 2
Assignment 
Ask Student Teachers to review their notes from the previous unit and bring to class, 
along with handouts and readings.
Forced choice (10 minutes)
Put up signs around the room of  different instructional models for dealing with 
developmental difference in education. 
Tell Student Teachers to quickly stand near the instructional model that best rep-
resents the child development class they are in. Ask them to explain their selection to 
someone standing nearby . 
Ask two or three Student Teachers to explain their decision to the class.
Next, have them move to the sign that is most like their ideal classroom. Ask them to 
explain their decision to someone standing nearby .
Ask for several Student Teachers to explain their decision to the class.
Creating a classroom environment (30 minutes)
Divide Student Teachers into small groups (three per group is ideal). 
Have groups select (or you can assign) an instructional model for which they have to 
then create a ‘classroom environment’; i.e. to ‘describe’ a classroom that is based on the 
principles of  that instructional model to demonstrate that they understand the key points.
They should present their environment on a poster.
Poster exchange (10 minutes) 
Ask each group to present their environment to another group. The group that is lis-
tening should listen and look for information that demonstrates that the other group 
understood the key features or principles of  the instructional model. 
Summary (10 minutes)
Invite a few groups to present to the whole class and to comment on the environ-
ments they created and whether they captured key points and principles of  the 
instructional model.
126
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 5: Alternative sessions
Although Howard Gardner’s theory of  multiple intelligences has been considered 
earlier, you may want to focus on a thorough review of  development by re-examining 
his theories.
Week 11, session 32: Gardner’s multiple intelligences theory
This session is an alternative to the session ‘Child development review I’.
Suggested reading: ‘Developing Multiple Intelligences in Children’ (in Faculty Resources).
Option 1
Reflection (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to reflect on an ideal learning situation they have experienced, 
one in which they learned the information or skill well. Ask the following questions.
•	 What sort of  activity was it? 
•	 What skills or approaches did you draw on? 
•	 Are you typically strong in this area of  learning?
10 + 2 lecture (25 minutes)
Present background information on the development of  the theory of  multiple 
intelligences, including Gardner’s reaction to Piaget (10 minutes). 
Ask Student Teachers to share the differences between Piaget’s and Gardner’s 
approaches (2 minutes). 
Present the seven intelligences outlined by Gardner (10 minutes). 
Ask Student Teachers to reflect on which intelligences they perceive to be their 
strengths (2 minutes).
Group work (25 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to select one intelligence they feel to be their strongest (recog-
nizing that usually people have multiple strengths) and form groups with those who 
favour the same intelligence. 
Ask Student Teachers to review the list of  ‘end results’ associated with that intelli-
gence. They can add additional end results to the list. 
Ask them to think of  a profession associated with the particular intelligence and to discuss 
why this is so. Could someone with a different type of  intelligence do the job as well?
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
127
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Option 2
Reflection (5 minutes)
Write a list of  different activities on the board. (These might include writing an essay , 
solving a math problem, performing a skit, drawing, or singing.) 
Ask Student Teachers to reflect on which types of  activities they prefer. 
Handout (20 minutes)
Give Student Teachers handouts on multiple intelligences (Dickinson’s ‘Learning 
through Many Kinds of  Intelligence’, available at
 Ø  http://www .ecdpak.com/Child-Centered-Classroom/Learning/Learning-
through-Many-Intelligence.pdf ). 
Ask them to review the handout, reflect on which intelligences are their strengths and 
weaknesses, and then partner with someone to share strengths and weaknesses.
Lecture (20 minutes)
Present background information on the theory of  multiple intelligences and go over 
Gardner’s seven intelligences. 
Debate (15 minutes) 
Present information on additional intelligences, an example of  which is naturalist 
intelligence. This type of  intelligence stresses sensitivity to the natural world and 
patterns and connections in nature. People with this type of  intelligence like to be 
outside and enjoy observing nature and listening to nature sounds. 
Pose this question for debate: ‘Is this type of  intelligence an important addition to the 
list of  intelligences’? 
Ask half  the class to create a list of  reasons why it is an important addition and the 
other half  to argue against it. Both opinions are shared at the end of  class.
128
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 11, session 33: Supporting multiple intelligences in 
classroom practice
This session is an alternative to the session ‘Child development review II’.
Resource: ‘Educational Implications of  the Theory of  Multiple Intelligences’ available at 
 Ø http://www .jstor.org/stable/1176460.
Option 1
Lecture (20 minutes)
Briefly review Gardner’s theory of  multiple intelligences, soliciting some of  this 
material from Student Teachers. 
Discuss the strategies that can be applied in classrooms to help accommodate learners 
with strengths across diverse intelligences. Emphasis is given to differentiated instruc-
tion and assessment. 
Personal reflection (5 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to consider a classroom lesson they recently observed. Ask the 
following questions:
•	 To what extent did the lesson accommodate multiple intelligences during   
 assessment activities? 
•	 Which intelligences were accommodated?
Group discussion (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to share in small groups their reflections on the visibility of  
multiple intelligences in their classrooms. 
Lesson design activity (20 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to choose one lesson that was shared and discuss ways that 
instruction and/or activities could be adapted to address intelligences beyond the ones 
already listed. 
Ask them to write up a classroom plan for that activity .
3-2-1 (5 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to write three things they have learned, two that they would like 
to know more about, and one idea or skill they have mastered from the unit so far.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
129
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Option 2
Student Teachers will need to bring in one lesson plan they have used or encountered 
in their studies. 
Brief essay (10 minutes)
Student Teachers consider which approaches for accommodating different learning 
styles are visible in the lesson plan they have brought to class.
Lecture (30 minutes)
Present different strategies for accommodating different learning needs, with empha-
sis on differentiated learning strategies.
Pair work (15 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to revisit the lesson plans they have brought in. 
Choose one Student Teacher’s lesson. Ask Student Teachers to adapt it to include 
activities or assessment that favour a type of  intelligence not previously addressed. 
Reflection (5 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to reflect on the following: ‘How appropriate is differentiated 
instruction for the school in which you observe (whether it is or is not used)?’
130
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 5: Additional information 
Additional information for Week 12, session 35
Common types of learning disabilities
Disability Difficulity Problem
Dyslexia Difficulty processing language Problems reading, writing, spelling, 
speaking
Dyscalculia Difficulty with math Problems doing math problems, 
understanding time, using money
Dysgraphia Difficulty with writing Problems with handwriting, spelling,  
organizing ideas
Dyspraxia 
(Sensory integra-
tion disorder)
Difficulty with fine motor skills Problems with hand–eye coordination, 
balance, manual dexterity
Auditory process-
ing disorder 
Difficulty hearing differences 
between sounds
Problems with reading, comprehension, 
language
Visual processing 
disorder
Difficulty interpreting visual 
information
Problems with reading, math, maps, 
charts, symbols, pictures
A child with a learning disability cannot try harder, pay closer attention, or improve moti-
vation on their own; they need help to learn how to do those things. A learning disability , 
or learning disorder, is not a problem with intelligence. Learning disorders are caused by a 
difference in the brain that affects how information is received, processed, or communicat-
ed. Children and adults with learning disabilities have trouble processing sensory informa-
tion because they see, hear, and understand things differently .
 Ø http://www .ldafs.org/information/information.php?itemId=31
Additional information for Week 12, session 3: Cognitive 
differences—Delays and giftedness
Web resource: ‘ Applying Vygotsky: Cognitive Development Turned Cognitive Delay’.
 Ø http://rainy28.hubpages.com/hub/vygotsky-cognitive-development-article-four
This article relates to cognitive delay , but it is also useful in thinking about the role of  
media in society , discussed in Unit 6. You may be able to draw on it in preparation for 
both units. The author notes, for example: 
 The sociocultural theory … essentially , states that a child’s development occurs in the 
direction of  outward to inward. As part of  this, Vygotsky devised three primary thoughts 
about cognitive development—internalization, the zone of  proximal development and 
scaffolding. Most directly applicable to this paper is his concept of  internalization, defined 
as the ‘process of  taking in knowledge or skills from the social contexts in which they 
are observed3. There is a dynamic relationship between what a child observes, how they 
observe and how they apply their interpretation of  what they observed. 
3 R. J. Sternberg and W. M. Williams, 
Educational Psychology (Boston, MA: 
Allyn & Bacon, 2002).
 UNIT     6  TEACHERS, FAMILY, SCHOOLS,
 AND SOCIETY
132
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Overview 
In this unit, Student Teachers will examine how families, society , schools, and teachers 
influence child development. Student Teachers will reflect on major concepts of  child 
development and the implications for teaching and learning, and especially focus on 
the role of  the teacher.
Week # T opics/themes
14
The role of  the nuclear and extended family 
Role of  community , culture, and society within families 
Role of  culture and society: Gender balance 
15
Role of  culture and society: Influence of  media 
Role of  school, peers, and teachers
Teachers’ influence on child development
16
Schools, families, and communities as partners in child 
development
Unit review
Course reflection and review
Learning goals 
 l demonstrate an understanding of  how culture, society , family , and school influence  
 child development
 l analyse the role of  the teacher in children’s learning
 l reflect on teachers’ conceptions about child development and its implications for   
 teaching and learning
 l identify factors influencing the learning process. 
Essential questions
•	 How do teachers influence children’s intellectual, social, and emotional   
 growth? (What positive and negative influences can teachers have?)
•	 How do different cultures, societies, or families shape child development?
•	 How should teachers manage a classroom to promote age-appropriate development?
•	 What can teachers do in the classroom to promote the inclusion of  all?
•	 How can teachers involve the community in children’s learning process?
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
133
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Enduring understandings
•	 Children benefit from the collaborative support of  family , community and   
 school as they grow toward maturity .
•	 While all children follow similar patterns of  growth and development, these are  
 shaped by culture.
•	 Teachers have a lasting impact on the lives of  children.
Additional resources
Books
Laura E. Berk, Child Development, 2nd ed. (Needham Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon, 1991).
Alison Lee, Childminder’s Guide to Child Development (New York: Continuum, 2008).
J. Santrock and S. Yussen, Child Development: An Introduction, 13rd ed. (New York: 
McGraw Hill, 2010).
Web resources
ECD Programme (2010). Nurture: Pakistan’s Pioneer Publication on Early Childhood Development. 
 Ø http://www .ecdpak.com/nurture/about_nurture.html
Early Childhood Development (ECD) Pakistan website.
 Ø http://www .ecdpak.com
Encyclopedia on Early Childhood Development.
 Ø http://www .child-encyclopedia.com/en-ca/home.html
Search-Institute. Forty developmental assets for early childhood, K–3, middle child-
hood, and adolescents. 
 Ø http://www .search-institute.org/developmental-assets/lists
R. Stefanelli, ‘Gender Equity: Is There Gender Equity in Your Classroom?’ 
 Ø http://www .cedu.niu.edu/~shumow/itt/Gender%20Equity .pdf
UNESCO. ‘Embracing Diversity: Toolkit for Creating Inclusive  
Learning-Friendly Environments’. 
 Ø http://www .unescobkk.org/education/inclusive-education/resources/
ilfe-toolkit/ 
Modified from: UNESCO. ‘Positive Discipline in the Inclusive, Learning-Friendly 
Classroom’.
 Ø http://www .teachereducation.net.pk/Manuals/Manual3.pdf
 Ø http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0014/001492/149284e.pdf
134
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Resources for this unit in Faculty Resources
Student T eacher reading
‘Parenting Styles’
‘Gender and Teaching’
‘Gender in Education Policy Project, from the Executive Summary’
‘Representation of  Women in the Advertisements’
‘Media Influence on Society’
‘Role of  the Media’
‘Television’s Effects on Children’
‘Parenting the Digital Generation’
‘The Classroom Environment as “ Another Teacher”’
‘Role of  the Elementary School Teacher’
‘Involving Parents’
‘Discipline Is Better Than Punishment: So What’s the Difference?’
‘Ensuring Desired Behaviour in Young Children’
‘Motivating Children to Learn’
Faculty resources
‘Is There Gender Equity in Your Classroom?’
‘The Influence of  Teachers’
‘Peer Influence’
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
135
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Unit 6: Session planning guide
Week 14, session 40: The role of the nuclear and 
extended family
Option 1
Introduction to the new unit (5 minutes) 
Explain to Student Teachers that the last three weeks of  the course will focus on how 
families, parents, teachers, school, and society affect child development. Explain the 
terms nuclear and extended family.
Self-reflection (5 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to reflect on their own experiences and write about one or more 
of  the following questions:
•	 What role do children play in your family? 
•	 What roles do nuclear and extended families play in your family?
•	 What are some ways your family influenced the person you are today?
Pair work (10 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to spend five minutes sharing ideas from their reflection with a partner.
Lecture (30 minutes) 
Review major roles and functions of  the family in Pakistani society and child socializa-
tion through the family . Points to emphasize:
•	 The diversity of  family systems in Pakistan.
•	 The traditions, customs, and societal set-up in different parts of  the country; for  
 example, urban and rural.
•	 The differences in society and within families living in the same regions.
•	 The variety of  child-rearing practices.
Group brainstorming (10 minutes) 
Ask participants to work in small groups to create a list of  functions of  the family in 
society and in rearing children. Groups share their list with the class or write their list 
on the chalkboard.
136
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Option 2
Introduction to the new unit (5 minutes) 
Explain to Student Teachers that the last three weeks of  the course will focus on how 
families, parents, teachers, school, and society affect child development. Explain the 
terms nuclear and extended family.
Small groups create graphic organizer (30 minutes) 
Organize Student Teachers into groups of  four or five.
Ask groups to create a visual or graphic organizer using poster or chart paper to 
show relationships:
•	 How families are influenced by and influence society .
•	 How nuclear families are influenced by and influence the extended family .
•	 How children are influenced by and influence the family .
•	 Include ways families help children learn and develop.
•	 Include ways families hinder children’s learning.
Ask Student Teachers to post their visual or graphic organizer where others can see it.
Gallery walk and lecture (20 minutes) 
Give Student Teachers a few minutes to look at the graphic organizers others have 
created. Lead them around the room, looking at the different ways relationships have 
been depicted. Bring out key points you want them to focus on, including:
•	 The diversity of  family systems in Pakistan.
•	 The traditions, customs, and societal set-up in different parts of  the country; for  
 example, urban and rural. 
•	 The differences in society and within families living in the same region.
•	 The variety of  child-rearing practices.
Summary (5 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to share insights or questions they have had during the session. 
Elicit as many as time permits.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
137
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Week 14, session 41: Role of community, culture, and 
society within families
Option 1
Reflection (5 minutes)
If  Student Teachers are keeping a journal, ask them to include the following:
•	 Think about past experiences from childhood in your community that have   
 shaped your life.
•	 Write a two-minute paper describing one of  these experiences. Write as much  
 as you can recall in two minutes. Explain why you think it was so important.
Pair-share (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to exchange journals (or papers) and read what their peer has 
written. Ask them to talk about positive and negative ways that communities shape 
who we are.
Anticipation guide (10 minutes)
Give Student Teachers a handout with the following statements (or others you choose 
from the lecture you prepare), arranged in the order in which you intend to address 
them in the active lecture to follow . Leave space after each statement for Student 
Teachers to take notes.
•	 Development occurs in the same pattern and rate for everyone throughout the world.
•	 Family parenting patterns are shaped by community , culture, and society .
•	 Socioeconomic role and status of  the family influence a child’s development.
•	 Gender differences do not have an impact on development.
•	 Community values do not influence how girls develop.
•	 Gender roles are largely determined by biology and not by culture.
Read aloud each of  the statements on the handout. Ask Student Teachers to mark 
whether they agree or disagree after you read each statement.
Point out that you will address each of  the statements in the lecture. They will have 
an opportunity to check if  their opinions match the information you share and wheth-
er or not they change their minds.
Active lecture (30 minutes) 
Draw on Vygotsky and other theorists’ models to highlight the role that society and 
culture play in child development. Include different aspects of  community , culture, 
and society that you have listed on the handout.
Pause for two minutes after each 8 to 10 minutes and allow Student Teachers to 
review their notes and check with peers next to them and compare.
138
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
At the end of  the lecture, ask:
•	 How many people changed their minds on one or more opinions?
•	 If  there are different experiences of  development based on these aspects, then  
 do we develop unequally? 
•	 Do differences lead to inequalities? 
Accept as many responses to each question as time permits.
One-minute paper and discussion (10 minutes) 
Tell Student Teachers they may write in their journal, if  they are keeping one, or in 
a notebook. Ask them to write as much as they can for one minute on the following 
question: How does society and culture affect child development differently for 
different people in Pakistan?
Ask Student Teachers to share their papers. Notice similarities and differences in the 
papers on the role of  society and culture in communities in Pakistan.
Option 2
Assignment 
Prior to class, ask Student Teachers to collect newspaper articles or pictures from 
magazines (these can be advertisements) about families (local or national) or family 
issues and life in the region.
Before class, set out tape or paste for placing the articles and pictures on cardboard or 
poster board displays around the room. 
Gallery walk (10 minutes)
As Student Teachers arrive for class, ask them to place their pictures on one of  the dis-
play boards and look at what others have brought. (Some may have the same articles, 
but don’t worry about duplicates.)
As they continue to add materials, have them make note of  the different topics and 
issues that are affecting families regionally and nationally .
Active lecture (30 minutes) 
Draw on Vygotsky and other theorists’ models to highlight the role that community , 
society , and culture play in child development. The lecture should include community , 
socioeconomic, and gender aspects and other impacts on development, and highlight 
the issue of  universal versus context-specific development. 
Pause after 10 minutes and ask Student Teachers to write a one-minute reaction.
After another 10 minutes, ask them to write another one-minute reaction.
Summarize and conclude.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
139
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Pair-share (10 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to share their two reactions with each other. Ask them to talk 
about two questions:
•	 How does society and culture affect child development differently for different  
 people in Pakistan?
•	 How does the surrounding community influence children’s growth and   
 development in Pakistan?
Discussion (10 minutes)
Lead the whole class in discussing the following questions as time permits:
•	 How does society and culture affect child development differently for different  
 people in Pakistan?
•	 If  there are different experiences of  development based on family , community ,  
 culture, and society , then do we develop unequally? 
•	 Do differences lead to inequalities? 
Assignment: Individual reflection 
Encourage participants to write and reflect on their personal experiences and observa-
tion. Ask them to consider the following questions:
•	 When did you observe children treated differently , either in your school   
 observation or previous experience in schools, due to a difference in class,   
 culture, learning ability , or gender? 
•	 Do you think the difference led to inequality? Why or why not?
Week 14, session 42: Role of culture and society— 
Gender balance 
A text set is available in Faculty Resources. Although readings in the set offer different 
perspectives, all support gender balance in keeping with government policy . Faculty 
who teach in areas where this is a difficult political issue should examine their own 
views and be prepared to help Student Teachers confront their own misconceptions. 
You will need the Internet resource: ‘Gender Equity: Is There Gender Equity in 
Your Classroom?’
 Ø http://www .cedu.niu.edu/~shumow/itt/Gender%20Equity .pdf  
Option 1
Assignment 
Prior to class, if  Student Teachers have Internet access, ask them to read ‘Gender 
Equity: Is There Gender Equity in Your Classroom?’ (see web address above). 
Assign one of  the short articles ‘Gender and Teaching’, ‘Gender in Education 
Policy Support Project’, or ‘Representation of  Women in the Advertisements of 
Contemporary Pakistani Magazines’ to each Student Teacher. Their task will be to 
summarize it for others.
140
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Review (5–10 minutes) 
Guide participants to review concepts from the previous class:
•	 How does the surrounding community influence children’s growth  
 and development?
•	 How do different cultures, societies, or families shape child development?
Explain that while the previous session covered how society and culture can lead to 
different developmental outcomes and inequalities for children, this class session will 
cover how schools and teachers can promote positive development for all.
Individual reflection (5 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to write in their journals about two of  the questions listed in 
the introduction to the text set in Faculty Resources on gender balance: 
•	 How do I feel about the issue being discussed?
•	 What are the stereotypes and misconceptions I bring when thinking about   
 gender balance?
Small groups share (15 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to form small groups of  six or seven. Each group should have at 
least two members who have read each article.
Ask Student Teachers to think about the classrooms they have observed or worked in. 
Ask them to consider the following questions:
•	 Are teachers aware of  gender balance as an issue? 
•	 In what ways do they show their awareness or lack of  awareness?
Use the ‘Causes of  Gender Inequity’ list from the assigned article and ask them to 
think about whether they have seen instances of  any of  the items mentioned.
Jigsaw (20 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to summarize the article to share with peers who did not read 
it. Ask them to discuss: ‘Do the articles reflect the needs and issues related to all or a 
part of  Pakistani society?’
Move about during group work. Notice those who have strong opinions or are inflexi-
ble in their thinking about this issue.
Summary (10 minutes)
Summarize key issues related to gender inequalities in child development, the role 
of  inclusive education, and the roles that schools and teachers can play in promoting 
equitable development.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
141
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Option 2
Assignment 
Prior to class, ask them to read ‘Gender Equity: Is There Gender Equity in Your 
Classroom?’ In addition to the document in Faculty Resources, you will need to down-
load the full resource from the Internet (see web address above). 
Assign one of  the short articles ‘Gender and Teaching’, ‘Gender in Education 
Policy Support Project’, or ‘Representation of  Women in the Advertisements of  
Contemporary Pakistani Magazines’ to each Student Teacher.
Individual reflection (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to reflect on their past primary school experiences and identify 
whether they were subjected to gender stereotyping either by their peers or teachers. 
Ask them how it influenced their motivation and learning process.
Textbook and curriculum analysis (30 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to analyse a selection of  primary-grade textbooks (from a mix 
of  subjects including science, social science, English, Urdu, and math) to identify 
instances of  gender stereotyping and the context in which it influenced or altered 
gender conceptions.
 
Class discussion (30 minutes)
Ask participants to engage in a dialogue on ways to eliminate gender stereotyping 
among classroom children. Give special emphasis to children’s motivation and learning.
Emphasize ways to utilize teaching strategies to promote inclusiveness.
Option 3
This option provides an alternative to textbook and curriculum analysis. Use the same 
articles as used in Option 1 and 2. 
Text-against-text (40 minutes) 
Have Student Teachers form small groups of  six or seven based on the articles they 
read. Each group should have at least two members who have read each article.
Give each group a complete text set from Faculty Resources. Ask them to summarize 
the article to share with peers who did not read it. 
Ask them to analyse and compare the articles, referring to the following questions: 
•	 How does the article portray the issue of  gender balance?
•	 How realistic do you think it is to address the issue of  gender balance in all   
 schools in Pakistan?
•	 What barriers do schools face in trying to achieve gender balance?
•	 Which articles appeal to you most? Why?
142
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Move about during group work. Notice those who have strong opinions or are inflexi-
ble in their thinking about this issue.
Summary (10 minutes)
Summarize key issues related to gender inequalities in child development, the role 
of  inclusive education, and the roles that schools and teachers can play in promoting 
equitable development.
Week 15, session 43: Role of culture and society—
Influence of media 
An additional article for use in preparation for class or as a reading prior to class is ‘ Activating 
Media to Combat Worst Forms of  Child Labour in Pakistan’, available online at: 
 Ø www .ilo.org/islamabad/whatwedo/projects/WCMS_143214/lang--en/index.htm
Option 1
Assignment 
Prior to class, ask Student Teachers to do the following:
•	 Collect a newspaper or magazine article or information from a website on   
 children, diversity , and difference in Pakistan. 
•	 Keep a log in which they write down things they notice about how media sur  
 round children (e.g. children seeing posters or signs advertising things and   
 children watching television). 
Media review (10 minutes) 
Ask participants to share their article and log with a partner. Ask them to consider the 
following questions: 
•	 What do their logs tell them about the ways children and adolescents are   
 exposed to media?
•	 What does the article or website say about children and diversity? 
•	 How does the source show the role of  media in the community , society , or   
 culture and its effects on children?
Small group analysis (50 minutes)
Form at least five groups of  five or six members each. Ask pairs go to separate groups. 
Make sure that you have at least one Student Teacher in each group who has sufficient 
English proficiency to help with reading. Give each group one of  the articles from the 
media text set:
•	 ‘Media Influence on Society’
•	 ‘Role of  the Media’
•	 ‘Television’s Effects on Children’
•	 ‘Parenting the Digital Generation’
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
143
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Ask groups to use their discussion in the media review as they analyse the text and 
consider the following questions:
•	 How does the writer support their opinion?
•	 Which examples are most effective?
•	 Does the article reflect needs and issues related to all or part of  Pakistani society?
After about 30 minutes, or when Student Teachers have completed the reading part of  
group work, send one group member to each of  the other groups so that all groups 
have at least one new member who has read the other articles. These members 
contribute to the discussion, referring to the article they read. Ask them to discuss:
•	 What challenges do teachers of  children and adolescents face in facing   
 media influence?
•	 Is there a ‘digital divide’ in your community or region (i.e. a division between  
 families who have and do not have access to media, television, computers,   
 mobile phones, iPods, and the like)?
•	 What challenges does a digital divide present for teachers?
If  time permits, you may want to juxtapose the online article on child labour with 
some of  the negative effects of  media discussed in the text set.
Reflection assignment
Ask Student Teachers to write in their journals and reflect on their reaction to the session.
Option 2
Assignment 
Assign one of  the short articles from the text set in Faculty Resources to each Student 
Teacher. Include the online article as one of  the articles if  they have Internet access.
Text-against-text (40 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to form small groups of  six or seven based on the article they 
read. Each group should have at least one member who has read each article.
Give each group a complete text set from Faculty Resources. Ask Student Teachers to use 
information from their article to contribute to analysis and discussion of  questions. Ask 
them to analyse and compare the articles, referring to the following questions: 
•	 How do the articles portray the issue of  media influence?
•	 What challenges do teachers of  children and adolescents face in dealing with   
 media influence?
•	 Is there a ‘digital divide’ in your community or region (i.e. a division between  
 families who have and do not have access to media, television, computers,   
 mobile phones, iPods, and the like)?
•	 What challenges does a digital divide present for teachers?
Move about during group work. Notice those who struggle with the reading and 
assist as needed.
144
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Small groups design a brochure (20–25 minutes) 
Organize Student Teachers into mixed groups according to the age they think they 
will want to teach. (Alternatively , ask them to remain in the groups they were in 
during the previous activity .)
Assign Student Teachers to make an informational brochure about children and the 
media, using ideas from the readings and class discussions. Have the group choose the 
target audience:
•	 Teachers 
•	 Community members
Discuss why a teacher needs to know about children and the media, and why com-
munity members should know about children and the media. This will help Student 
Teachers develop content for their brochure.
Each brochure should include:
•	 Effects of  different kinds of  media.
•	 Suggestions for different age groups.
Ask groups to post their brochure on the graffiti wall.
Week 15, session 44: Role of school, peers, and teachers
Assignment
For both options, prior to class assign ‘The Classroom Environment as “ Another Teacher”’.
Option 1
Lecture (20 minutes) 
Talk about the impact that schools have on child development and give examples of  
how both the physical school environment and teaching styles might affect the learning 
process. Include the main points from the reading on creating the right environment.
Brainstorming and illustrating key ideas (20 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to form small groups and give each a piece of  chart paper and 
markers/crayons.
Ask them to use ideas from the class reading and their classroom observations to 
illustrate on charts ways to develop environments of  schools and classrooms that are 
conducive to learning. 
Ask them to use graphic organizers, pictures, or phrases.
Gallery walk and class discussion (20 minutes)
Take a gallery walk with Student Teachers to look at their posters. Use the opportu-
nity to summarize the key elements that constitute a conducive school and classroom 
environment for effective learning.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
145
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Option 2
Class discussion and brainstorming (10 minutes) 
Appoint two Student Teachers to write down ideas on the board or chart paper. Ask 
the class: 
•	 In what ways does the school influence child development?
•	 How does the classroom influence child development?
•	 What are some ideas for creating a positive environment for child development  
 that were mentioned in the assigned reading? 
Elaborate and add to the list as necessary .
Dream classroom (15–20 minutes) 
Ask participants to write a journal entry describing what the environment and 
teaching style would be like in their dream classroom to promote positive cognitive, 
emotional, and social growth for children (ask them to choose either a pre-primary , 
primary , or adolescent class).
Instead of  writing in their journals, you might have each Student Teacher draw a 
classroom map with call-outs or balloons giving specific details such as teaching style, 
how they will promote diversity , and the like.
Share with partners (10 minutes) 
Ask participants to share their journal (or map) with a partner and discuss how their 
narratives are similar or different and why .
Summary (10–15 minutes) 
Review key points about the connection between classroom environment and child 
development. Point out that the government commitment to promoting active learning 
reflects understanding of  the vital connection between how and what children learn.
Week 15, session 45: T eacher’s influence on  
child development
Option 1
Individual reflection (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to write about their memories of  teachers. Ask them to spend 
five minutes each to write about both a favourite teacher and a teacher they disliked. 
Ask them to describe the teacher and answer the following:
•	 What were the attributes of  that teacher? 
•	 Relate characteristics with their style of  teaching, especially their styles of    
 communication and social interaction with children.
•	 How did the teacher contribute to your learning and intellectual growth?
146
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Triads share (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to meet in groups of  three to compare teachers. 
Ask them to consider the following: What generalizations can they make, based on 
their own descriptions, about things that teachers do to promote child development 
and hinder child development?
Lecture (20 minutes)
Invite Student Teachers to compare their generalizations to your comments in the lecture.
Describe Erickson’s characteristics of  a good teacher. 
Introduce the idea of  self-fulfilling prophesies in students based on teachers’ expectations.
Class brainstorming and discussion (20 minutes)
Ask: ‘What influence do peers have on children’s learning?’
Appoint two or three recorders to list ideas that come up.
Invite Student Teachers to brainstorm based on their own experiences.
After they have offered a list of  suggestions, ask: ‘What place has peer influence had 
on your learning in this course?’ Accept all responses.
Ask: ‘What is the teacher’s role in mediating peer influence?’
Option 2
Assignment 
Prior to the session, ask Student Teachers to collect small objects from the environment 
(e.g. scraps of  cloth, magazine pictures, words or phrases clipped from magazines or 
newspapers, leaves, or small sticks) that they can use to create a symbol for their experi-
ences with teachers and other children. They will be given more detail in class. 
Ask them to read the student paper ‘The Influence of  Teachers’ from Faculty Resources.
Individual reflection (15–20 minutes)
Give Student Teachers a variety of  craft and junk materials to supplement what they 
have brought (e.g. packing material from boxes, soda straws, toothpicks, and glue).
Ask each Student Teacher to create some kind of  symbol that represents the influence 
that teachers and other children had on their primary school experience. 
Remind them that this is not an artistic competition but an activity to represent 
their experiences.
Ask them to include both positive and negative experiences.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
147
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Provide note cards or paper strips and have each Student Teacher write a brief  explanation 
of  their symbol so that others can understand it during the gallery walk to follow .
Gallery walk (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to visit as many displays as time permits and look for common 
features in the experiences. 
Mini-lecture (15 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers the following question: ‘What are some general statements we 
might make about the influence of  peers, based on our own experiences?’
 
Take two or three responses. 
Ask the following question: ‘What are some general statements we might make about 
the influence of  teachers?’
Take two or three responses.
Describe Erickson’s characteristics of  a good teacher.
Introduce the idea of  self-fulfilling prophesies in children based on teachers’ expectations. 
Small group discussion (10–15 minutes)
Give groups a copy of  the student paper ‘The Influence of  Teachers’ from Faculty 
Resources. Ask them to reflect on the paper. Ask groups to discuss the following questions: 
•	 Given what you know about child development, what other theorists would   
 you suggest that the writer include in their discussion about the role of  the   
 teacher in child development?
•	 If  you were going to write a short paper on the influence of  peers, what would  
 be your key points? What theorists would you draw on?
148
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 16, session 46: Schools, families, and communities 
as partners in child development
Assignment 
For both options, prior to class, ask Student Teachers to read ‘Involving Parents’ in 
Faculty Resources. Ask them to bring their copies to class.
Option 1
Concept formation groups (30 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to form small groups of  four to six members. Give each group a 
set of  the following labels from the article ‘Involving Parents’.
•	 Nurturing the child’s learning needs
•	 Reviewing the child’s performance at school
•	 Developing the child’s language skills
•	 Introducing learning at home
•	 Participation in school events
•	 The lack of  planning and mutual understanding between teachers and  
 family members
•	 School’s failure to value the contribution of  families
•	 Family’s misunderstanding of  the school and classroom programme
•	 Family’s lack of  interest in what is happening at school
Ask groups to sort the labels into at least two categories and to be able to explain their 
grouping.
After about 10 minutes, ask the groups to report on their categories. Accept all deci-
sions. There is no one way to categorize them, but all categories should be reasonable.
After all groups have reported, and if  no group has already mentioned it, explain that 
some of  the labels are headings in the article they read for class. Others represent 
barriers to family participation.
Ask: ‘What connection is there between family parenting practices and family partici-
pation in a child’s schooling?’ Take as many opinions as time permits.
Reading (15 minutes)
Review the four types of  child-raising practices and how they affect child develop-
ment. Remind Student Teachers that not only do caregivers affect how children learn 
and grow , but their involvement in school is also important. 
Poster session (20 minutes) 
Ask participants to work in small groups of  four or five to design an informational poster 
for family members describing how they can become involved in their child’s education.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
149
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Gallery walk (20 minutes) 
Groups will hang their posters around the room and view posters made by the other 
groups. Debrief  the activity , highlighting why caregivers should be involved in their 
children’s education and reviewing the ways families can be active. 
Class discussion (5 minutes)
Ask participants to review what teachers and schools can do to encourage  
family involvement.
Option 2
Lecture (10 minutes)
Review the four types of  child-raising practices and how they affect child develop-
ment. Stress that caregivers affect how children learn and grow and their involvement 
in school is important.
Group role play preparation (20 minutes) 
Ask participants to work in groups of  two or three to prepare a short role play of  less than 
five minutes. The roles are a teacher and caregiver (parent or other family member).
In the role play , the teacher discusses with the family member(s) how he or she can 
become more involved in the child’s education.
Role-play presentation (20 minutes) 
Randomly choose four or five groups to share their role plays with the class. Although 
all groups will not present their role play , ask class for other ideas that could be includ-
ed at the end of  the presentations.
Think, pair, share (10 minutes) 
Ask participants to think and discuss with a neighbour how teachers can encourage 
certain families to take part in their children’s education. Then ask participants to share 
their ideas with the group. Summarize key strategies for partnering with families.
150
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 16, session 47: Unit review
Option 1
Essay exam (20 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to write an essay in which they discuss the question: ‘How do 
community , culture, and society interact in child development?’ Encourage them 
to time their responses to each item, taking no more than three minutes per topic 
so there will be a few minutes to review the final paper. Tell them to include a brief  
discussion of:
•	 Role of  nuclear and extended family
•	 Gender balance
•	 Influence of  media
•	 Role of  school and the school environment
•	 Role of  peers and teacher education college or university
•	 Role of  parents as partners with teacher education college or university
Peer review (40 minutes)
Organize Student Teachers in groups of  three or four, ensuring that there is a mixture 
of  stronger and weaker participants. Ask the groups to discuss their responses to each 
question and note places where they are not clear or need more information.
Question and answer and summary (10 minutes)
As time permits, take questions from groups. Provide tips on how to take an essay 
exam. Encourage Student Teachers to take their exams home and check them against 
their readings and class notes.
Option 2
Small group review (20 minutes)
Organize Student Teachers into at least six small groups, including a mix of  stronger 
and weaker participants in each group, to the extent possible. Give each group one of  
the following topics discussed in the unit:
•	 Role of  nuclear and extended family
•	 Gender balance
•	 Influence of  media
•	 Role of  school and the school environment
•	 Role of  peers and teacher education college or university
•	 Role of  parents as partners with teacher education college or university
Ask the group to prepare a summary of  important ideas and issues learned in 
studying the topic.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
151
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Group presentation and critique (30 minutes)
Ask each group to spend four to five minutes to present its summary .
Take about two minutes for Student Teachers questions or critique.
Respond to misconceptions or refer the class back to readings or class notes.
Week 16, session 48: Course reflection and review
If  Student Teachers have completed a child study or portfolios, you may want to 
reserve this session for presentations. You can help them to review the course as they 
respond to presentations of  the child study or portfolios. 
You may also want to prepare a summary sheet listing the major topics covered in 
each unit and key points for them to review .
Option 1
Review game (20–30 minutes) 
Prepare a question-and-answer game. Student Teachers work in teams and score 
points for each correct question. Questions can require them to name a theorist, 
describe a development issue, give examples relating development to practice, etc.
Question and answer (20–25 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to write down questions about concepts, theorists, or issues 
they are unclear about following the review game.
Collect the questions. Read each in turn (set aside duplicate questions) and invite any 
Student Teacher to provide an answer or resource for finding the answer. 
Reflection and feedback (10 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to reflect on the course of  the semester and provide feedback 
on the following questions: 
•	 What did you learn that changed the way you think about child development?
•	 What ideas will you take from this course and use in your classroom practice? 
•	 What suggestions do you have for the Instructor in teaching this course for   
 Student Teachers next year or next semester?
Assignment
Ask Student Teachers to prepare a letter of  advice to future teachers, making rec-
ommendations on how to best support child development and learning for diverse 
learners. Letters can include suggestions for involving parents, working with the 
community , inclusion, discipline and class management, and children’s motivation. 
Letters should include at least 10 suggestions for practice and give justifications based 
on theories, cases, and methods studied in class. In other words, Student Teachers 
will write and support what they would do in a classroom and why to foster positive, 
inclusive child development.
152
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Option 2
Class discussion (15 minutes) 
Guide the class to reflect on the course, using the following guiding questions: 
•	 What did you learn that changed the way you think about child development?
•	 What ideas will you take from this course and use in your classroom practice?
•	 What questions do you still have about child development in general or as it   
 relates to teaching?
Encourage everyone to share a few of  their ideas with the class. 
Quiz (15 minutes)
Prepare a short-answer or multiple-choice quiz, going over key concepts in the course.
Give Student Teachers 15 minutes to complete the quiz. (Set the test in English or 
Urdu, depending on which will most benefit your students in terms of  learning the 
key concepts.) 
Quiz review (20 minutes)
Go over the quiz with Student Teachers, discussing correct answers as well as readings 
and resources they will need to review for their examinations.
Feedback (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to write a short anonymous letter to the Instructor addressing 
what they liked most about the course, one central understanding they have learned, 
and suggestions on how they would improve the course. 
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
153
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Additional topics 
The topics and options below may be used if  time allows.
T eacher’s influence on student motivation
Suggested reading: ‘Motivating Children to Learn’.
Option 1
3-2-1 (15 minutes) 
Ask participants to write three things they have learned from the reading on motiva-
tion, two things they found especially interesting, and one question they have for the 
class or Instructor.
Ask participants to share what they wrote with a partner, and then review concepts 
and ask their questions to the class.
Group work (15 minutes) 
Ask participants to work in small groups and review the difference between intrinsic 
and extrinsic motivation. 
Participants should give an explanation for each, explain the benefits of  each kind of  
motivation, and give several examples for each type. 
Groups should organize their ideas on a poster or large sheet of  paper to hang and 
share with the class.
Class discussion (15 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers the following questions:
•	 What can teachers do to engage children and encourage motivation for learning? 
•	 What are things teachers can say or do to praise a learner? 
•	 What are things teachers should not say or do in the classroom because they   
 will discourage children’s participation?
Ask participants to share ideas and write them on the blackboard.
Unit review (15 minutes)
Review the major concepts, understandings, and themes of  the unit.
Option 2
Think, pair, share (10 minutes) 
Ask participants to reflect on the reading and write a paragraph about how to best moti-
vate a child in the class (ask them to choose pre-primary , primary , or adolescent students).
Ask participants to share their ideas with a partner and then the class.
154
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Lecture (20 minutes)
Explain the difference between extrinsic and intrinsic motivation and age-appropriate 
strategies of  motivation for the classroom.
Observation journal reflection (15 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to work in groups to share reflections from their classroom 
observation journal and to specifically highlight strategies and practices of  teachers 
for discipline, classroom management, and motivation. 
Unit review (15 minutes) 
Review the major concepts, understandings, and themes of  the unit.
Discipline versus punishment
Suggested reading: ‘Discipline Is Better than Punishment’ and ‘Ensuring Desired 
Behaviour in Young Children’ in Faculty Resources. 
Option 1
Group brainstorming (15 minutes) 
Drawing from the readings, guide participants to list characteristics of  discipline 
versus punishment. Brainstorming should also include pros and cons for each. 
The Instructor or participants can list different characteristics in a table on the blackboard. 
Use the opportunity to correct misconceptions and/or provide additional information.
Case studies (20 minutes) 
Prepare one or two case descriptions of  children who misbehave in the classroom 
and the teacher’s response to use as case studies. (Alternatively , you can ask Student 
Teachers to bring a description of  a child who is misbehaving to use in class. Provide 
guidelines for writing up their description.)
Have the Student Teachers form small groups to read and discuss the classroom 
management strategy of  a teacher described in the case. 
Participants should discuss and prepare to present:
•	 How does the teacher use discipline or punishment in the scenario? 
•	 What discipline practices are appropriate for the child development phase? 
•	 Which practices are potentially harmful?
Group exchange and sharing (15 minutes) 
Divide each group in half  and exchange members with another group. Give members 
from each group about seven minutes to present their case study and helpful or 
harmful practices for discipline and classroom management from the case.
COURSE GUIDE: Child Development
155
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2
Summary (10–15 minutes)
Have Student Teachers take one minute to write a KWL list.
Lead a discussion on reactions to the class as well as their remaining questions.
Option 2
Active lecture (15 minutes) 
Talk about the difference between punishment and discipline. Why is it important to 
consider children’s development and to use age-appropriate strategies for disciplining 
children? Chunk your comments into two-minute segments, with time for Student 
Teachers to compare notes or ask questions between the two.
Group work (20 minutes)
Ask participants to review the readings and compile a list of  ideas for positive disci-
pline in the classroom and classroom management. 
Give Student Teachers a case study (see Option 1) and ask them to think about posi-
tive disciplinary measures that would help the teacher respond to the situation. 
Alternatively , ask Student Teachers to prepare a presentation (poster session or 
PowerPoint presentation) for teachers that will help them understand and use positive 
discipline rather than punishment with children.
Group exchange (15 minutes) 
Ask each group to share their presentation with another group.
Summary (5–10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to identify key concepts in the session. Summarize as needed.
