Classroom 
Assessment
COURSE GUIDE
Associate Degree in Education/
B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary
2012
semester     4
This product has been made possible by the support of  the American People through the United States Agency for 
International Development (USAID). The contents of  this report are the sole responsibility of  the authors, and do 
not necessarily reflect the views of  USAID or the United States Government.
Technical Support: Education Development Center (EDC); Teachers College, Columbia University
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
ii
Foreword
Teacher education in Pakistan is leaping into the future. This updated Scheme of  Studies is the latest 
milestone in a journey that began in earnest in 2006 with the development of  a National Curriculum, 
which was later augmented by the 2008 National Professional Standards for Teachers in Pakistan and 
the 2010 Curriculum of  Education Scheme of  Studies. With these foundations in place, the Higher 
Education Commission (HEC) and the USAID Teacher Education Project engaged faculty across the 
nation to develop detailed syllabi and course guides for the four-year B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary and the 
two-year Associate Degree in Education (ADE).
The syllabi and course guides have been reviewed by the National Curriculum Review Committee 
(NCRC ) and the syllabi are approved as the updated Scheme of  Studies for the ADE and B.Ed. (Hons) 
Elementary programmes.
As an educator, I am especially inspired by the creativity and engagement of  this updated Scheme of  
Studies. It offers the potential for a seismic change in how we educate our teachers and ultimately our 
country’s youngsters. Colleges and universities that use programmes like these provide their students 
with the universally valuable tools of  critical thinking, hands-on learning, and collaborative study .
I am grateful to all who have contributed to this exciting process; in particular the faculty and staff  
from universities, colleges, and provincial institutions who gave freely of  their time and expertise for 
the purpose of  preparing teachers with the knowledge, skills, and dispositions required for nurturing 
students in elementary grades. Their contributions to improving the quality of  basic education in 
Pakistan are incalculable. I would also like to thank the distinguished NCRC members, who helped 
further enrich the curricula by their recommendations. The generous support received from the 
United States Agency for International Development (USAID) enabled HEC to draw on technical 
assistance and subject-matter expertise of  the scholars at Education Development Center, Inc., and 
Teachers College, Columbia University . Together, this partnership has produced a vitally important 
resource for Pakistan.
PROF . DR SOHAIL NAQVI
Executive Director
Higher Education Commission
Islamabad
 

HOW THIS COURSE GUIDE W AS DEVELOPED
iii
How this course guide was developed
As part of  nationwide reforms to improve the quality of  teacher education, the 
Higher Education Commission (HEC) with technical assistance from the USAID 
Teacher Education Project engaged  faculty across the nation to develop detailed 
syllabi and course guides for the four-year B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary and two-year 
Associate Degree in Education (ADE). 
The process of  designing the syllabi and course guides began with a curriculum 
design workshop (one workshop for each subject) with faculty from universities 
and colleges and officials from provincial teacher education apex institutions. 
With guidance from national and international subject experts, they reviewed the 
HEC scheme of  studies, organized course content across the semester, developed 
detailed unit descriptions and prepared the course syllabi. Although the course 
syllabi are designed primarily for Student Teachers, they are useful resource for 
teacher educators too. 
In addition, participants in the workshops developed elements of  a course guide.  
The course guide is designed for faculty teaching the B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary 
and the ADE. It provides suggestions for how to teach the content of  each course 
and identifies potential resource materials. In designing both the syllabi and the 
course guides, faculty and subject experts were guided by the National Professional 
Standards for Teachers in Pakistan 2009 and the National Curriculum 2006. The 
subject experts for each course completed the initial drafts of  syllabi and course 
guides. Faculty and Student Teachers started using drafts of  syllabi and course 
guides and they provided their feedback and suggestions for improvement. 
Final drafts were reviewed and approved by the National Curriculum Review 
Committee (NCRC).
The following faculty were involved in designing this course guide: Syed Tariq 
Khurshid Gilani, GCET Muzaffarabad, AJK; Alia Ayub Siddiqui, Sardar Bahadur 
Khan Women University , Quetta; Muhammad Nawaz Khattak, GCE Gilgit; 
Muhammad Sharif, RITE (M) Kohat; Muahmmad Saeed Khan, University of  
Hazara, Mansehra; Muhammad Khalid Mahmood, University of  Education, 
Lahore; Fizza Sabir, Fatima Jinnah Women University , Rawalpindi ; Nasir 
Mahmood, IER University of  the Punjab University , Lahore; Ijaz Ahmad Shahid, 
GCET (M) Lalamusa; Muhammad Usman Ghani, GCET Faisalabad; Nida Mirza, 
University of  Sindh, Hyderabad; Tanweer Ahmed Khan, BoC Sindh, Jamshoro; 
Muhammad Nawaz Shaikh, GECE (M) Larkana; Dr Javed Iqbal, Karakoram 
International University , Gilgit; Syed Abdul Majeed Shah, BoC Balochistan.
iv
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Subject expert guiding course design: Dr. Margaret Jo Shepherd, Teachers College, 
Columbia University
Date of  NCRC review process: 3 March 2012 
NCRC Reviewers: Dr Rehana Masroor, Dean Faculty of  Education, Allama 
Iqbal Open University , Islamabad; Dr. Mussaret Sheikh, Chairperson Education 
Department , Fatima Jinnah Women University , Rawalpindi; Dr Rizwan Akram, 
Professor IER University of  the Punjab, Lahore.

T able of Contents
Syllabus  08
Planning guide 27
 
UNIT 1  Classroom assessment—What are we talking about? 29
 
UNIT 2  Assessment is a process that connects teaching 
 and learning  47
 
UNIT 3 Assessment tools 61
 
UNIT 4 T eacher-made tests—How do teachers do it? 79
 
UNIT 5 Review through practice 106
 
 
Course resources 115
Syllabus 
CLASSROOM ASSESSMENT
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
09
CLASSROOM ASSESSMENT
Year/semester
Year 2, semester 4
           
Duration (hours)
48 hours (16 weeks)
 
Credit value
3 credits
Prerequisites
Successful completion of Semester 3 courses
Course description
It is natural for teachers to assume that students learn when the teacher teaches. It 
isn’t sufficient, though, to assume that students are learning. Teachers need to know if  
students are learning. Yes, teachers give tests to find out if  students are learning from 
the teacher’s lessons. But often these tests occur at intervals of  five or six weeks (or 
even longer periods). By the time the teacher learns that some students haven’t been 
learning, those students are far behind others in the class. Without frequent assess-
ment of  their learning, it will be very hard for the students who have fallen behind to 
catch up with others in the class. 
Classroom assessment, a set of  educational practices taught in this course, enables a 
teacher to make instructional decisions with and for students based on information 
obtained from frequent evaluation of  learning. There are many definitions of  classroom 
assessment. Here is one: 
Tests have a role in the evaluation of  learning in school. However, there are notable 
differences between a test and an assessment. Any given test is a one-time event. 
Classroom assessment is a continuous process. Some tests, called external tests, are 
created by people who do not know the students who will take the test. In contrast, 
assessments are planned and conducted by teachers with their own students. Tests 
are part of  the assessment process, but they are only one of  many assessment 
tools. Assessment is a broad concept. A teacher conducting an assessment collects 
information about learning from several perspectives and uses more than one 
assessment tool. 
This course is organized around two central classroom assessment activities. The 
first involves incorporating assessment activities into lessons. This means including 
assessment targets and criteria that represent success in achieving the targets—in 
addition to the lesson’s learning objectives—in lesson plans. The second assessment 
activity is constructing an achievement test.
Classroom assessment is the process of collecting and interpreting information about 
learning and teaching as it occurs in a classroom for the purpose of making decisions 
that improve opportunities for learning.
COURSE SYLLABUS : Classroom Assessment
10
The goal of  the first activity is to illustrate how assessment can improve learning and 
instruction. You have studied about learning goals, outcomes, and/or objectives in other 
courses, and you know how to use them in lesson plans. You’ll use that knowledge now 
to distinguish between learning objectives and assessment targets. You will see how to 
write assessment targets and where they belong in a lesson plan. You will learn how 
to set the criteria that a student must meet in order to show that she or he has met the 
target and, therefore, achieved the lesson’s learning objectives. You will see that you 
have to choose, from among several options, assessment tools that will give you the 
information you need to determine if  students have achieved the lesson’s objective. 
The goal of  the second activity is to show you that creating an appropriate 
achievement test for your students is more than just writing questions (though 
that is a central part of  the process). You will see that good tests require a blueprint 
(usually called a Table of  Specifications). The blueprint helps you decide the topics 
and learning objectives your test should include and how many questions you should 
write for each. You will learn what it means when a test is called standardized and also 
how to improve a test after you have given it once. 
As you start this course, please understand that many teachers are already assessing 
student learning in their classrooms. They do it when they ask questions. They do it when 
they read and provide feedback on homework. They do it when they give a quiz or test. 
But most teachers aren’t really aware of  the importance of  these assessment activities, and 
they don’t assess student learning in a systematic way or with sufficient frequency . 
Course outcomes
At the end of  the course, you should be able to:
•	 write a lesson plan that includes assessment targets, criteria for demonstrating  
 success achieving the targets, and appropriate assessment tools
•	 explain the purpose of  a Table of  Specifications for a test (test blueprint) to  
 a colleague
•	 show a colleague how to construct a Table of  Specifications for a test 
•	 distinguish between good and weak short-answer, multiple-choice, true-false,   
 and matching questions from an actual test and explain why each question is   
 good or weak
•	 identify the characteristics of  effective feedback and provide an example
•	 construct a rubric for a performance assessment task
•	 defend, with conviction, the claim that reliable information from assessments   
 about students’ learning status increases the effectiveness of  instructional decisions
T eaching and learning framework
As the course description indicates, this course is organized around two complex 
assessment activities that teachers are expected to do in their classrooms: construct and 
use fair and reliable tests, and incorporate assessment into lessons. Student Teachers 
learn how to make a test by studying the steps in the process and then following them 
with the help of  a coach or mentor and analysing the experience while it is under way . 
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
11
One expects to improve with practice and good feedback from the coach or mentor. 
One also expects to learn from analysing students’ performance on test questions and 
eliminating, adding, and/or rewriting questions based on that analysis.  
After some experience planning and teaching lessons, Student Teachers learn to 
combine assessment and instruction by first acquiring some knowledge about 
assessment. They learn how to write assessment targets that match the lesson’s 
learning objectives and figure out what constitutes credible evidence that the learning 
objectives have been achieved (success criteria). Then one must know the assessment 
tools that are available and choose tools that are valid measures of  the assessment 
target and learning objective. When the necessary knowledge about assessment is 
at hand, teachers can study examples of  lesson plans that include assessment and 
then write a plan and get feedback from a peer or a mentor. As with constructing an 
achievement test, one expects to improve with practice, good feedback from another 
interested person, and self-assessment of  the experience.
This course teaches skills as well as knowledge and should include a practicum. 
Because it isn’t certain that Student Teachers taking the course will have access 
to a practice site, it is unlikely that a test you construct or a lesson you plan can 
be tried with primary school students. As an alternative, practice materials have 
been created that can be used in college and university classrooms. The materials 
represent component parts of  the larger tasks. The practice materials also serve as 
models for the tasks of  constructing a test and writing assessment plans to use while 
teaching lessons.
The practice materials are intended for individual use (or work in pairs), after 
which Student Teachers form pairs (new pairs if  the original work was in pairs) and 
exchange work for marking and feedback. When the pairs have shared their feedback 
with each other, the whole class can come together to discuss what they have learned 
from using a particular practice exercise. Two of  these practice exercises may become 
assignments and graded. The rest should be marked but, in the spirit of  formative 
assessment, should not be graded.
In sum, the dominant learning experience for this course involves practice exercises 
created from component parts of  two complex assessment activities for which 
teachers are responsible. Individual (or pair) practice will be followed by interactions 
between peers working in pairs. They will mark each other’s work and provide feed-
back. Then the class can convene as a whole and, led by the faculty member, probe 
the experience they have just had to make generalizations about assessment that are 
worth recording in their notebooks.
Faculty may serve the role of  coach throughout the course. They can guide and 
correct practice as represented in the skills exercises and then guide group reflection 
on that practice. This is essentially a skills-based course. Student Teachers need to 
acquire knowledge, too, but the knowledge serves learning a skill. For example, 
understanding a contemporary theory of  motivation helps Student Teachers learn 
how to give feedback to students. 
 
COURSE SYLLABUS : Classroom Assessment
12
CONTENT OUTLINE
Unit 1: Classroom assessment—What 
are we talking about?
(3 weeks/9 hours)
For most of  the recorded history of  state-sponsored education, tests, in some form, 
have been the dominant means for determining what individual students learn 
from attending school. Tests are given to determine an individual’s competence to 
participate in ‘what comes next’ in the educational trajectory from young child to 
adult: the next unit in the curriculum, the next class, secondary school, university , a 
job with specific credentials, etc. Over the course of  the 20th century , tests became so 
important in school and in the world of  work that it would be hard to find a literate 
person who hadn’t taken several of  them. The stakes in the score one receives on a 
test are often high: the score determines whether a person is accepted or rejected 
from a place in a university , for example. 
As the 20th century became the 21st, methods for evaluating learning in school in 
addition to tests were introduced to teachers. (Teachers were already using some 
of  the methods.) These ideas are described by the words assess and assessment. 
Attracted to a more comprehensive approach to evaluating learning in school, 
teachers in many parts of  the world are in a slow transition from an entirely test-
based culture for evaluating learning in school to an assessment-based culture. This 
unit is about that transition. 
The unit begins with you. How was student learning measured when you were in 
school? Did the method or methods change as you progressed through school? Do 
you remember any time when a teacher gave you feedback about your score on a test 
that was intended to help you learn? What do you remember about the feedback from 
teachers that you received in primary and secondary school?
After probing your personal experience with others’ judgments about an individual 
student’s learning in school, you will study the meaning of  the terms evaluation, 
measurement, testing, and assessment and study the difference between summative and 
formative assessments. Then you are introduced to the assessment standard (Standard 5) 
in the National Professional Standards for Teachers in Pakistan, Ministry of  Education 
2009. With your personal experience active in memory , some definitions in mind, and 
your country’s assessment standard for teachers in view , you will study examples that 
illustrate assessment at home and in school. Then you will study the use of  feedback 
to students, an essential component of  assessment. As you can see, the use of  effec-
tive feedback is one component of  the assessment standard in Pakistan’s National 
Professional Standards for Teachers. 
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
13
Using your own experience in schools, the assessment examples, and concepts studied 
in this unit, the class will attempt to list characteristics of  a test-based culture and 
an assessment-based culture for measuring learning in school. Finally , using this 
contrast chart and vocabulary chosen for the task, the class will write a definition for 
classroom assessment. The distinctions between evaluation cultures (test-based and 
assessment-based) and the definition of  classroom assessment can be changed during 
the semester.
Unit outcomes
At the end of  the unit, you should be able to:
 l identify the features and provide an example of  specific and constructive feedback
 l explain the difference between measurement, evaluation, testing, and assessment
 l explain the difference between summative and formative assessments
 l contrast an assessment-based culture in schools with a test-based culture
 l define classroom assessment and identify the most important words and ideas in   
 your definition.
Week 1: Definitions, personal experience, professional 
standards, and examples
Session # T opics/themes
1
The purpose and content of  the course
Distinction between the meanings of  measurement, evaluation, 
testing, and assessment
Your experience of  measurement, evaluation, testing and assessment
The distinction between summative and formative assessment
2 The assessment standard in the National Professional Standards 
for Teachers in Pakistan
3
Examples of  assessment 
•	 Asim, age 12, learns how to gain weight
•	 The first lesson in a unit on the solar system
•	 Ms Khan’s grade 4 class
COURSE SYLLABUS : Classroom Assessment
14
Week 2: Feedback that moves learning forward
Session # T opics/themes
1
The concept of  feedback as it is used by biologists and engineers
The concept of  feedback as it is used by teachers
Examples of  conscious and unconscious feedback by teachers
Summaries of  research on teachers’ feedback to students 
indicate that it has a powerful effect on learning
The psychological effects for students of  positive feedback and 
negative feedback 
2
The theory of  motivation that guides decisions about feedback: 
A growth mindset
Types of  feedback and their purposes
Characteristics of  effective feedback
Feedback as encouragement versus feedback as praise
Do oral and written feedback have identical effective features?
3
A practice exercise
•	 Study and critique a teacher’s first feedback to a student, age 
11, on his answers to a test on the solar system
•	 Study advice to that teacher about her feedback to the student
•	 Study and critique the teacher’s feedback to the same student 
on the same test in response to the advice she received
•	 Reflection on what was learned about feedback
Week 3: The context for classroom assessment in Pakistan
Session # T opics/themes
1
Assessment policy and practice in government and private 
schools in Pakistan
Presentation of  information collected in interviews with teachers, 
peers, and parents about assessment
2 The concept of  culture
3
Contrasting test-based culture in the classroom with an 
assessment-based culture 
Create a definition of  classroom assessment that is appropriate 
to culture(s) in Pakistan
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
15
Unit 2: Assessment is a process that 
connects teaching and learning
(3 weeks/9 hours)
Classroom assessment is described as a process. English dictionaries contain more 
than one meaning for the word process. The distinguishing feature of  all meanings 
is that more than one action is involved in an effort to achieve a specified result. 
These actions are continuous. Educators have chosen the term to describe actions 
undertaken to evaluate learning and improve achievement in school. Process is 
an important classroom assessment concept because it carries the message that 
evaluation of  learning in school is not an event that occurs only at scheduled times 
during the school year. Assessment of  learning is, or should be, a continuous practice 
throughout the school year. 
The purpose of  this unit is to present the decisions and actions that create the process 
of  assessment in a classroom. You will have the opportunity to practice some of  the 
actions. You will have the opportunity to study and discuss other decisions and actions 
that are inherent in the classroom assessment process. During the first week of  the 
unit, you will learn the meaning of  a learning goal as distinct from a learning objective 
and practice writing learning objectives. You will study the assessment components of  
a lesson plan: learning targets, success criteria, and appropriate assessment activities. 
You will practice writing these components into sample lesson plans.
In the second week of  the unit, you will focus on procedures for recording data 
obtained from assessments. You will go back to the description of  Ms Khan’s 
classroom and discuss a teacher’s monitoring notebook and students’ subject matter 
journals as means for recording assessment data. You will examine a form created to 
record student participation in class discussions. You will see variations in the kinds of  
information a teacher might want to collect about students’ participation in classroom 
discussions. You will talk about using information from the student participation 
records to make decisions about instruction. You will create a form for recording 
student’s answers to a math quiz.  
Assessment data have to be interpreted to be useful. Scores are guides to interpretation, 
but they don’t tell how a student’s performance compared with that of  other students 
who took the test. Scores don’t tell what a student knows and can do within the realm 
of  knowledge covered by the test. Scores, alone, don’t provide clues to important 
factors within the student or within the test that might have influenced a student’s 
performance on the test. Before a test score can be interpreted, however, the teacher 
needs to have a sense that the interpretations she or he gives to the score are reliable and 
valid. Reliability and validity are logical concepts until they are measured for a particular 
test or assessment tool. Then they become psychometric (as well as logical) concepts. 
Interpretation of  assessment data is the topic of  the third week of  the unit. You will 
COURSE SYLLABUS : Classroom Assessment
16
learn the meaning of  the word psychometric. Then you will learn that validity and 
reliability are not properties of  tests. Validity and reliability have meaning when used to 
characterize the interpretations and conclusions that are made from test scores. You will 
learn that all assessments are subject to error. You will study three frames of  reference 
for interpreting assessment data: a norm-referenced frame, a criterion-referenced frame, 
and a self-referenced frame. 
Two ‘big ideas’ are the foundation for the unit. First, the title of  the unit claims that 
assessment unites teaching and learning. Second, some people believe that assessment, 
particularly the use of  a test, is an objective action. They mean that assessments used 
to evaluate human behaviour are less influenced by opinion and bias than teacher 
judgements alone. Yes, teachers use assessment data to make decisions about instruction 
and learning rather than relying on their opinions alone. But remember you, the 
teacher, make the decisions about what to assess and how to assess it. Assessments are 
designed to be fair and unbiased, but assessment is not a neutral enterprise. The same 
person who is going to use the assessment data to make decisions about teaching and 
learning made the decisions that created the assessment plan.  
In the last session of  the unit, you will have a chance to discuss these ideas. Where 
in the assessment process do you see direct connections with teaching? Do the 
connections extend directly to learning? Knowledgeable people claim that professional 
judgements is the most important element of  assessment. What do these people 
mean? How does this relate to the point above that teachers make decisions about 
collecting data on students’ learning that they then use to make decisions about 
teaching? You will share thoughts about objectivity in assessment and the role of  
professional judgements in assessment. 
Unit outcomes
At the end of  this unit, you should be able to:
 l write a complete assessment plan into a lesson plan
 l explain the necessity for recording assessment data and identify the challenges that  
 necessity presents
 l identify the places in the classroom assessment process where the teacher has to   
 make a decision
 l identify points in the classroom assessment process where assessment connects   
 teaching and learning
 l explain the concepts of  reliability, validity, and measurement error.
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
17
Week 4: Learning objectives, learning targets, and success 
criteria
Session # T opics/themes
1
Definitions for learning goals, learning objectives, learning targets, 
success criteria, and formative assessment
Difference between the terms learning objectives, learning targets, 
and success criteria
Use of  example lesson plans (‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’) to 
discuss the process of  creating assessment-embedded lesson plans
2
Using examples of  assessment-embedded lesson plans to study 
the relationship between learning objectives, learning targets, 
success criteria, and formative assessment
Working backward to write learning objectives, learning targets, 
success criteria, and formative assessments after studying the 
activities included in the lesson plans
Practice providing peer feedback on language and clarity 
of  learning objectives, learning targets, success criteria, and 
formative assessments
3
Working backward to write learning objectives, learning targets, 
success criteria, and formative assessments after studying the 
activities included in the lesson plans
Week 5: Recording assessment data
Session # T opics/themes
1
Recording assessment results 
Class discussions as opportunities to learn find out what students 
know and understand about a topic 
Recording student participation in discussion
Drawing conclusions about student participation and student 
knowledge from records of  participation in discussion
2
Student’s participation in recording evidence of  learning
Methods for recording assessment data 
•	 Ms Khan’s monitoring notebook
•	 Students’ science journals
•	 Distinguishing between assessment procedures used by 
teachers and procedures used by students
3 Constructing a class record to document student achievement
COURSE SYLLABUS : Classroom Assessment
18
Week 6: Interpreting assessment data
Session # T opics/themes
1
Test scores do not lead directly to educational decisions, though 
educational decisions are made and actions are taken on the 
basis of  interpretations of  test scores
Interpretations and conclusions made from test scores should be 
valid and reliable 
Validity as a concept
Validity as a psychometric construct 
Reliability as a concept 
Reliability as a psychometric construct
Validity and reliability are not properties of  the tests but of  
conclusions from test scores
2
Frames of  reference for interpreting scores from assessment tasks
•	 Norm-referenced frame of  reference
•	 Criterion-referenced frame of  reference
•	 Self-referenced frame of  reference
Other names for norm-referenced and criterion-referenced 
interpretations of  students’ scores on assessment tasks
•	 Relative interpretations (comparable to norm-referenced 
interpretations)
•	 Absolute interpretations (comparable to criterion-referenced 
interpretations)
•	 Explanation for each of  these interpretations of  performance
Illustrations of  each of  these interpretations of  scores from 
assessment tasks
3
Create a diagram of  the assessment process
Identify places in the diagram where assessment connects 
learning with instruction
Create one diagram, if  possible, which everyone in the class  
can endorse
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
19
Unit 3: Assessment tools
(4 weeks/12 hours)
Assessment tools are activities and devices that elicit responses from students that are 
indicators of  learning. Records are kept so the teacher has information to use when 
making decisions about what to teach to the class and to individual students. 
Think for a few minutes about the assessment tools to which you have already been 
introduced in this course: a teacher’s monitoring notebook, students’ journals for 
specific school subjects, a teacher’s questions designed to elicit the knowledge students 
already have about a new topic, and a monitoring record of  students’ participation in 
class discussions. These are called informal assessment tools. (You used some informal 
assessment tools in the student teaching practicum last semester, too.) The purpose of  
this unit is to increase your knowledge of  the range, from simple to complex, of  the 
tools you can create for assessing learning in your classroom.
The unit begins with the informal tools with which you are already familiar. You will 
also conduct an interview with a primary school teacher. The purpose is to learn 
which, if  any , assessment practices she or he uses as well as their beliefs about and 
attitudes toward classroom assessment.
During the second week of  the unit (week 8 of  the course), you will learn about the 
use of  essays as assessment tools. In week 3 (week 9 of  the course), you will study 
performance-based assessments other than essays. You will construct a rubric with 
which to assess what students have learned through project work. In the final week 
of  the unit, you will acquire some formal knowledge about portfolios intended 
to help you with the portfolio you will submit near the end of  your next student 
teaching practicum.
Unit outcomes
At the end of  this unit, you should be able to:
 l construct, use, and analyze a simple interview tool
 l know the forms and uses of  essay questions
 l construct short-answer essay questions that conform to guidelines recommended  
 by assessment experts
 l construct a rubric for a performance assessment task
 l explain the different types of  portfolio assessments
 l describe the ways portfolio assessments are evaluated.
COURSE SYLLABUS : Classroom Assessment
20
Week 7: Interviewing teachers about assessment
Session # T opics/themes
1
Interviews
Constructing an interview tool to collect data about teacher 
practices, opinions, and beliefs about assessment
2 Conducting the interview
3
Discussion and analysis of  data collected in the interview
Critique of  the interview tool
Week 8: Essay questions: Measuring complex achievement
Session # T opics/themes
1
Short-answer essays
Longer-answer essays
Learning goals that can be measured by short-answer essays
Learning goals that can be measured by longer-answer essays
Advantages and disadvantages of  essay tests
2
Guidelines for writing essay questions
Practice writing essay questions
3 Guidelines for scoring essay questions
Week 9: Performance-based assessment (project-based 
assessment)
Session # T opics/themes
1
Definition of  performance-based assessment 
Use of  an example of  extended performance-based assessment 
(the green bean competition) to study different features of  
performance-based assessments
Studying different features of  a rubric and its relationship with 
the learning objectives and assessment tasks included in the 
performance-based assessment project
2
Understanding different characteristics of  performance-based 
assessment tasks by conducting a short performance-based 
assessment task in class
Using a rubric to grade a performance-based assessment task
Understanding usefulness and challenges in using performance-
based assessment tasks in class
3 Designing a performance-based assessment task
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
21
Week 10: Portfolios: Summarizing student achievement
Session # T opics/themes
1
What qualifies as a portfolio of  student work?
Types of  portfolios
•	 Project portfolios
•	 Growth portfolios
•	 Achievement portfolios
•	 Competence portfolios
•	 Celebration portfolios
•	 Working folders
Purposes of  portfolios
•	 Instruction
•	 Assessment
2
Guidelines for portfolio entries
Reflection and self-evaluation as part of  the portfolio process
Portfolio conferences
3
Assessing portfolios
Advantages and disadvantages of  portfolios
Unit 4: T eacher-made tests—How do 
teachers do it?
(4 weeks/12 sessions)
This unit walks you through the process of  test construction. Tests are one of  the 
most commonly used assessment tools, so it is important to learn to write effective 
and fair tests. Effective and fair tests represent the instructional material (material 
the test is intended to cover) in its entirety and do not include anything that was not 
taught by the teacher. In order to achieve the goal of  effectiveness and fairness, this 
unit familiarizes students with different features of  standardized tests and the purpose 
of  and difference between norm-referenced and criterion-referenced tests. You will 
also explore personal experiences and opinions about tests before delving into the 
steps for creating a test. You end this unit by creating a standardized mini (12-item) 
test and learning how to interpret test results.
COURSE SYLLABUS : Classroom Assessment
22
Unit outcomes
At the end of  this unit, you should be able to: 
 l come to personal conclusions about strengths and limitations of  tests
 l achieve a clear understanding of  the features of  a standardized test
 l understand the difference between and purpose of  norm-referenced and  
 criterion-referenced tests
 l understand the purpose of  a Table of  Specifications (test blueprint) and learn how  
 to use it
 l write effective test questions and put together a 12-item mini-test
 l use an assessment tracker to judge the quality of  a test and interpret test scores.
Week 11: Tests as assessment tools
Session # T opics/themes
1
Exploring personal experiences and feelings about tests
Discussing the strengths and limitations of  tests as assessment tools
Understanding that tests are one of  many assessment methods 
and like any other assessment tool have their own pros and cons
2
Exploring the definition of  achievement tests and standardized tests
Discussing different characteristics and examples of  
standardized tests
3 Studying two types of  score interpretations for tests: Norm-
referenced vs. criterion-referenced
Week 12: The test construction process
Session # T opics/themes
1
Start of  the test construction process
Learning to create a Table of  Specifications -the first step in 
creating a test
Drawing connections between learning objectives and a 
Table of  Specifications
2
Creating a Table of  Specifications to help write test questions
Discussing the effectiveness of  Table of  Specifications in real-life 
classroom situations
Connections between Bloom’s Taxonomy and the  
Table of  Specifications
Classifying test questions according to Bloom’s categories
3
Studying the differences between strong and weak test questions
Exploring the characteristics of  strong test questions
Practicing writing short-answer, sentence completion, multiple-
choice, and true-false questions
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
23
Week 13: Writing test questions
Session # T opics/themes
1 Continue to practice writing test questions
2 Putting the test together
3
Studying characteristics of  clear test directions
Practice writing test directions
Week 14: Practice interpreting test scores
Session # T opics/themes
1
Review of  Student Teachers’ current knowledge about the 
interpretation of  test scores
Introduction to assessment tracker (a tool for assessing the 
quality of  the test and of  student learning)
Studying an example of  an assessment tracker in detail to 
explore its main features
2 Learning to use an assessment tracker to interpret test scores
3 Using the assessment tracker to provide constructive feedback 
to students
Unit 5: Review through practice
(2 weeks/6 hours)
As mentioned, this course is organized around two assessment competencies that 
are central to effective teaching. The first of  these is the teacher’s motivation and 
know-how (meaning knowledge and skill) to include and use assessment plans in 
lessons. This enables continuous assessment that is corrective to the teacher regarding 
learning objectives and instruction and for the student regarding effort and learning 
strategies. The second competency is the motivation and know-how to write tests 
that produce valid, reliable, and fair evidence for interpretations about learning. 
This enables assessment that gives students and teachers summary statements about 
learning achieved over a particular period of  time. Used together, these assessment 
competencies accomplish the reasons for evaluating learning in school: first, to 
facilitate learning, and then to measure it when the big decisions about ‘what’s next?’ 
have to be made. 
This unit provides the opportunity to practice each of  these competencies with 
variations in the way you practiced the component skills during the course. During 
the course, you wrote learning objectives and assessment plans into sample lessons. 
During the first week of  this unit, you will write a lesson/assessment plan on a 
topic and subject of  your choice. During this course you constructed a test based on 
COURSE SYLLABUS : Classroom Assessment
24
multiple-choice, true-false, matching, and short-answer questions. In the second week 
of  the unit, you will write a final examination for this course based on essay questions. 
While the point hasn’t been made yet in the course, there is evidence from research 
that writing a test is a particularly good way to study for taking a test. 
NOTE: If your college or university gives final examinations composed of objective 
questions, it may be to your advantage when studying for the final exam to prepare a test 
based on essay questions.
To date, you have practiced component assessment skills in pairs. In this unit, you will 
work independently and then form a pair for feedback.
Unit outcomes
By the end of  the unit, you should be able to:
 l write a lesson plan that includes an assessment plan
 l write a test based on essay questions that meet guidelines for questions that   
 require reasoning
 l determine when essay questions are more appropriate than objective test questions.
Week 15: Writing an assessment-embedded lesson plan
Session # T opics/themes
1
Review at least two of  the sample science lessons into which 
you wrote learning objectives, learning targets, success criteria, 
and assessment tools
Review definitions and differences between a learning objective 
and a learning target
Selecting success criteria
Listing assessment tools/methods used or studied in the course 
Designing a template for a lesson plans 
Choose a topic for your lesson/assessment plan
2
Write your lesson/assessment plan
Select a partner with whom you will exchange feedback
3
Exchange feedback on the lesson plans
Share feedback with the class
Identify the main points about the assessment in lessons that 
were taught in this course
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
25
Week 16: Writing a test based on essay questions that could be 
used as a final examination for this course
Session # T opics/themes
1
Review the reason(s) for essay questions
Review the two types of  essay questions
Review guidelines for writing essay questions
Review the disadvantages of  essay questions
Identify course topics for essay questions
2
Identify the conditions under which final examinations are given 
in your college or university (for example, the length of  the 
examination period)
Identify the course topics you plan to include in your test
Writing essay questions based on topics in this course
Developing grading criteria for selected questions in the essay test
3
Exchange feedback on essay tests
Answer a partner’s question and return it to them for marking
Marking essays based on grading criteria 
T extbooks and resources
P . Black, C. Harrison, B. Marshall, and D. Wiliam, Assessment for Learning: Putting It 
into Practice (Berkshire, UK: Open University Press, 2010).
S. Clarke, Active Learning through Formative Assessment (London: Hodder Education, 2008).
J. H. MacMillan, Classroom Assessment: Principles and Practices for Effective Standards-
Based Instruction, 5th ed. (Boston: Pearson, 2011).
M. D. Miller, R. L. Linn, and N. E. Gronlund, Measurement and Assessment in Teaching, 
11th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson, 2013).
R. Stiggins, J. Arter, J. Chappius, and S. Chappius, Classroom Assessment for Student Learning: 
Doing It Right–Using It Well (Boston: Pearson, 2006). This text has a DVD and a CD.
D. Wiliam, Embedded Formative Assessment. (Bloomington, IN: Solution Tree Press, 2011).
There are several website addresses to use for the course. These websites are listed on 
the handouts where they will be used. 
COURSE SYLLABUS : Classroom Assessment
26
Course assignments
Assignments are listed on a separate handout. The assignments will contribute to 
your grade.
Suggested assignments:
•	 A lesson plan with an embedded assessment plan
•	 A short test with the Table of  Specifications and an answer key
•	 A performance-assessment project and its scoring rubric
Grading policy
The university and its affiliated colleges will determine the course grading policy . 
This should be shared with you (Student Teachers) at the beginning of  the course. 
It is recommended that at least 50 per cent of  the final grade be determined by 
course work undertaken during the semester. Course work may include assignments 
completed in schools.
Planning guide
28
 PLANNING GUIDE : Classroom Assessment
Planning guide
In this planning guide, you will find ideas for teaching and learning this course. 
For some sessions, detailed plans are provided. These session plans are examples, 
not prescriptions. The sessions were created in the belief  that examples are helpful 
platforms for creative work and that faculty will adapt them to their local context. 
The writers of  the course aimed to respect copyright and have sought permission to 
use copyright material where necessary . Please contact EDC in case of  questions or 
concerns about any of  the materials used at www .edc.org.
 
 UNIT     1  CLASSROOM ASSESSMENT—
 WHAT ARE WE 
 TALKING ABOUT?
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
30
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
UNIT 1: CLASSROOM ASSESSMENT—
WHAT ARE WE TALKING ABOUT?
(3 weeks/9 hours)
T eaching and learning resources for Unit 1
Handouts for Student T eachers
Week 1
‘Unit 1, Week 1, Session 2: National Professional Standards for Teachers in Pakistan 
(NPSTP) Standard 5 Assessment’
‘Unit 1, Week 1, Session 2: Assessment Helps Asim Gain Weight’
‘Unit 1, Week 1, Session 2: Assessment in a Lesson about the Solar System’
‘Unit 1, Week 1, Session 2: Assessment in Ms Khan’s Grade 4 Class’
Week 2
‘Unit 1, Week 2, Session 3: Teacher Feedback on the Solar System Unit Test: Before 
Receiving Advice’
‘Unit 1, Week 2, Session 3: Teacher Feedback on the Solar System Unit Test: After 
Receiving Advice’
‘Unit 1, Week 2, Session 3: Memo to Teacher about Feedback on the Solar System Unit Test’
Week 3
‘Unit 1, Week 3, Session 2: List of  Contrasts between a Test-based and an Assessment-
based Culture in Schools’
Resources for faculty
From Week 1 throughout the course
 Ø http://peoplelearn.homestead.com/BEduc/Chapter_10.pdf
This is a chapter on assessment from a book posted on Asia e University . Relevant 
definitions are presented on pages 255–257, and distinctions between summative and 
formative assessment are presented on pages 265–266.  
Week 2
Grant Wiggins, ‘Seven Keys to Effective Feedback’, Educational Leadership (September 
2012): Available at: 
 Ø http://www .ascd.org/publications/educational-leadership/sept12/vol70/num01/
Seven-Keys-to-Effective-Feedback.aspx
31
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Readings
Week 1
•	 Clarke, pp. 7–17 (history of  formative assessment as well as distinctions   
 between formative and summative assessment) 
•	 McMillan, pp. 9–11
•	 Miller, Linn, and Gronlund, pp. 27–34 (definitions of  assessment, evaluation,   
 and measurement)
•	 Stiggins, Arter, Chappius, and Chappius, pp. 29–46 (especially pp. 42–47)
McMillan has a very informative table on page 63 that shows the range of  assessment 
methods (in this course called tools). A transparency of  this table will help make the 
point that assessment is a much broader practice than testing.  
Week 2
•	 Black, Harrison, Lee, Marshall, and Wiliam, pp. 30–57
•	 Clarke, pp. 18–34 and 139–141
•	 McMillan, pp. 134–147
•	 Wiliam, pp. 107–131
Week 1: Definitions, personal experience, 
professional standards, and examples
This course is designed to persuade Student Teachers that evidence about learning 
collected in the classroom can be used to improve, as well as judge, student 
achievement. The course is also designed to teach Student Teachers that there are 
tools in addition to tests that, when used together, give detailed information to the 
teacher about adaptations to instruction that improve student achievement. Given 
these goals for the course and the influence of  experience as a student on behaviour 
as a teacher, it is very important for Student Teachers to examine carefully their own 
ideas and feelings about assessment in the classroom. Student Teachers need to be 
aware of  the beliefs and assumptions they bring to the study of  assessment so that 
they are free to look carefully and critically at ideas and practices introduced in this 
course that may differ from those they experienced in school.
Session 1: Classroom assessment: Definitions and 
personal experience
Review the course syllabus (10 minutes)
Distribute the course syllabus. Rather than going through the entire syllabus in detail, 
provide a brief  overview and ask Student Teachers to read it thoroughly for homework. 
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
32
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Presentation and discussion (20 minutes)
Provide definitions of  testing, measurement, evaluation, and assessment. Give them a 
definition of  classroom assessment. Finally , present the distinction between summative 
and formative assessment. Definitions that you provide can be created from those in 
the references listed above.  
Student Teachers should take away the following from the presentation:
•	 Definitions of  measurement and testing are standard, but definitions of    
 evaluation and assessment vary from one assessment expert to another.  
•	 Assessment is a process that is more comprehensive than testing.
•	 The concepts of  evaluation and interpretation are often interchanged. Though   
 not synonyms, each term refers to an analysis of  students’ performance that   
 results in inferences about factors influencing academic achievement.
•	 Although assessment experts elaborate on the difference between formative 
and summative assessment, there is only one significant difference. That 
difference is the purpose for which the assessment is undertaken and the way 
the assessment data are used. Summative assessment scores are used to certify 
competence; formative assessment scores are used to improve instruction and 
learning. As Student Teachers will see during Week 2 of  this unit, a summative 
test after the original purpose of  the test has been satisfied can be turned into 
a formative assessment. The reverse is not true. A formative assessment in the 
original form cannot be turned into a summative test.  
Small group leading to whole-class discussion (30 minutes)
Using small group discussions leading to full class discussions, give Student Teachers 
the opportunity to discuss their experiences with tests and other assessment tools in 
school. You could guide the discussion with questions in the unit outline.
Homework
In addition to reading the course syllabus, ask Student Teachers to interview a 
primary school teacher and principal about testing and assessment in school. They 
should also interview a parent and another college or university student about their 
experience with testing and/or assessment in school. Tell Student Teachers that they 
should be prepared to share the results from their interviews in class during Session 1 
of  Week 3.  
Session 2: The assessment standard in the National 
Professional Standards for T eachers in Pakistan
This session is designed to: 1) help Student Teachers understand what the assessment 
standard in the NPSTP specifies they should know and be able to do in the domain of  
classroom assessment (Standard 5) and 2) identify the knowledge and skills they will 
learn in this course that are relevant to the standard.
33
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Check what Student Teachers’ know about the NPSTP (15 minutes)
First, ask them to define standard as educators use the word. Then ask them to explain 
why the Ministry of  Education in Pakistan wanted professional standards for teachers.  
Ask if  they assessed themselves against the NPSTP during the practicum in Semester 
3. If  the answer is yes, ask for a few volunteers to share their self-assessment of  the 
assessment standard with the class. If  the answer is no, ask Student Teachers to look 
at the rubric for Standard 3 with a partner and then assess themselves. Invite a few to 
share their self-assessment.  
Presentation on standards in education (20 minutes)
Prepare a presentation on standards, focusing on the National Professional Standards 
for Teachers in Pakistan. The content of  this presentation obviously depends on the 
knowledge Student Teachers bring to the topic. Prior to your presentation, distribute 
the handout for this session (‘National Professional Standards for Teachers in Pakistan 
Standard 5 Assessment’). Refer to this document during your presentation and allow 
time for Student Teachers to review relevant text and ask questions.
You may wish to include the following content in your presentation.
The English word standard can be used as a noun (‘The department is creating standards 
for public transport providers’) or as an adjective (‘This book is the standard reference 
for Mughal history’). Among teachers and other educators, standard is used as a noun.
Teaching standards are created by achieving consensus among a group of  people who 
know about and understand teaching. The group may include practicing teachers 
and academics. The standards they develop describe the characteristics of  effective 
teaching. When the Policy and Planning Wing of  the Ministry of  Education in 
Islamabad endorsed the NPSTP , the standards became the model of  effective teaching 
in Pakistan.  
The NPSTP are general teaching standards for all teachers in all grades. It is also possible 
to develop teaching standards for specific subjects, such as standards for teaching science 
or Urdu. The standards in the NPSTP describe a teacher’s work in three domains: 
knowledge and understanding, performance and skills, and dispositions. 
The rubrics for the NPSTP provide a description of  the standard at one of  four 
levels. Level 1 describes the standard performed by an inexperienced teacher. Level 4 
describes the standard performed by an experienced and very proficient teacher. 
In the rubrics for the NPSTP , standards are further broken down into strands. The 
assessment standard is broken into four strands: assessment linked to learning 
objectives, formative assessment, summative assessment, and providing feedback. 
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
34
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
A standard is a composite of  knowledge, skill, and dispositions. Standards vary great-
ly; they may be general and inclusive descriptions, or they may be very specific. The 
NPSTP are general standards. They describe the work of  an effective teacher, but they 
are not a description of  what an observer would see a teacher do or hear a teacher say , 
and they do not describe the actual knowledge a teacher needs. Like most standards, 
the NPSTP have to be deconstructed, or broken down, to understand them better.
Deconstructing the assessment standard in the NPSTP (30 minutes) 
Direct Student Teachers’ attention to the rubric for Standard 5 about assessment. If  
needed, provide more time for them to read the descriptions at each level.
Explain that the rubric begins to break down the standard and to describe a teacher’s 
work in more detail. However, it doesn’t describe what an observer would see a 
teacher do or hear them say in a classroom or in a meeting with parents, for example. 
Divide Student Teachers into small groups (three or four members). Direct all of  the 
groups to the Level 4 description and ask them to list specific things they might see a 
teacher do or hear a teacher say that would provide evidence that they are at that level. 
Share an example: the rubric says that a teacher at Level 4 ‘coaches children to engage 
in objective self-assessment’. So, an observer might see a teacher sitting with a child 
listening to the child explain how she solved a math problem and then asking if  she 
thinks that solving such problems is easier now compared with the previous lesson.
Invite groups to share their evidence with each other. Invite volunteers to compile 
the evidence before the next session and display it in the classroom. Remind Student 
Teachers that this is not a complete list (it would never be complete). Consider returning 
to it later in the course.
Homework (5 minutes)
This homework assignment is intended to prepare Student Teachers for the next class 
session. Tell them to review their class notes from the first session this week to refresh 
them of  the difference between formative and summative assessment and the particular 
characteristics of  formative assessment. If  sufficient copies of  the book Embedded 
Formative Assessment by Dylan Wiliam are available, tell Student Teachers to read pages 
27–50 before the next class. Distribute handouts for the next class (‘ Assessment Helps 
Asim Gain Weight’, ‘ Assessment in a Lesson about the Solar System’, and ‘ Assessment in 
Ms Khan’s Grade 4 Class’). Tell Student Teachers to read these examples of  assessment 
before the next class.  
Session 3: Examples of assessment
The purpose of  this session is to help Student Teachers make a clear distinction between 
the purpose of  summative assessment and the purpose of  formative assessment.  
Presentation and class discussion (10 minutes)
This is a review session prior to discussing the three examples of  assessment in the 
handouts Student Teachers received at the end of  the last class session. The content 
should come from Student Teachers’ class notes, the previously assigned readings, and 
the chapter by Wiliam assigned at the end of  the last class session.  
35
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Case study and discussion (15 minutes)
Check that Student Teachers have the handout ‘ Assessment Helps Asim Gain Weight’. 
Allow the class 10 minutes to work in small groups and then bring them together 
to report to each other. There are questions to stimulate discussion on the handout. 
Remind Student Teachers that this assessment did not take place in a classroom, and 
the assessment target is a physical process rather than a mental process. 
Discuss the following questions:
•	 What opportunities for learning does this assessment situation provide?  
•	 Who is doing the assessment?
Class discussion: Assessment in a lesson on the solar system (15 minutes)
Follow the pattern established with the weight gain example. Check that Student 
Teachers have the handout ‘ Assessment in a Lesson about the Solar System’. This 
handout does not have questions attached, however. There are two important points 
to make with this example.
First, Student Teachers should see the relationship between the assessment target and 
the lesson’s learning objectives. The second important point centres on the Student 
Teacher’s ability to identify all the assessment activities in the lesson, including the 
guiding questions. Again, ask for reports of  the small group discussion from two groups.
Class discussion: Assessment in Ms Khan’s grade 4 class (15 minutes)
Check that Student Teachers have the handout ‘ Assessment in Ms Khan’s Grade 4 
Class’. There are questions attached to this handout that can guide the small group 
discussion. Ms Khan’s monitoring log is an important feature of  this example. Ask 
Student Teachers to discuss the practice of  keeping such as log from the standpoint of  
utility and feasibility . Do they believe that they could keep a similar log? How would 
they use it? Would they organize it by date or create a separate page for each student? 
Again, ask two groups to summarize their discussion for the class.
Closing (5 minutes)
Tell class members that the following week is devoted to a study of  feedback; they 
will begin to provide constructive written feedback to each other in the third class 
session. Remind them that the following week is devoted to a study of  the cultural 
context, both in and out of  school, in which assessment occurs. Remind them, also, 
that they are expected to come to the first class session in Week 3 prepared to report 
on interviews they have conducted with a teacher and principal currently working in a 
primary school. They should also interview a parent of  a student currently enrolled in 
a primary school and another person (not preparing to teach), who is approximately 
their age. The purpose of  these interviews is to find out these people’s memories 
and opinions about the ways learning is evaluated in primary schools in Pakistan. 
The interviews can be built around the questions that the Student Teachers discussed 
during the first class session this week. Those questions are in the description of  Unit 
1 in the Course Syllabus.
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
36
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Week 2: Feedback that moves  
learning forward
Session 1: Adding to Student T eachers’ prior knowledge 
about feedback in school
In class today (5 minutes) 
Feedback is an essential component of  classroom assessment. Most advocates for 
a culture of  assessment in schools believe that assessment is only complete when 
feedback that produces positive change in instruction and learning is an outcome of  
the assessment process. This week is devoted to the study of  effective feedback to 
students. As discussed earlier, Student Teachers will practice written feedback with 
each other for the duration of  the course.
Give Student Teachers an advance organizer (outline) for today’s class:
•	 Presentation and discussion of  their experience with and definition of  feedback  
 in school
•	 Oral presentation by you of  definitions of  feedback used by biologists,   
 engineers, and teachers
•	 Class discussion of  differences, if  any , in these definitions
•	 Oral presentation by you about research on feedback on learning in school,   
 highlighting studies by British educational psychologist Ruth Butler
•	 Volunteer ‘significant point statements’ about Butler’s research
•	 Homework assignments
Invite a Student Teacher to repeat the outline for today’s class.
Class discussion: Prior knowledge and experience with feedback in school 
(15 minutes) 
Tell Student Teachers to choose a partner for a dialogue about experience with 
feedback from their teachers on tests, papers, homework, and class discussions. Ask 
them to spend 5 minutes thinking together about a definition of  feedback as it is used 
in school. Reconvene the class to discuss their recollections and elicit some definitions. 
Ask a class volunteer to write two or three definitions on the board (or chart paper), 
assuming there are two or three different definitions.
Presentation: Conceptions of feedback from biology , engineering, and 
education (10 minutes)
Prepare your presentation to cover the following information. 
Biology . The process by which a system (molecule, cell, or organism) is controlled 
or changed by the response it produces. The intent is to maintain balance within the 
system so it survives. Negative feedback is a signal sent back when a system needs 
to slow down or stop completely . Your stomach doesn’t need to work when you 
37
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
aren’t eating, for example. Positive feedback is the opposite. Rather than slowing or 
stopping a biological system, positive feedback is a signal that increases the action of 
the system.
Engineering. The process whereby some portion of  the output signal of  a system is 
fed back as input. The flush mechanism on a toilet is a good example of  a mechanical 
feedback system. Inside the cistern (the part of  the system that holds the water), there 
is a ball that floats on the water. The ball is connected by lever to a valve that can open 
and let in water. This float valve is often used to regulate the filling of  a toilet cistern. 
When the toilet is flushed, the water level drops, and the float descends, levering 
the valve opening and allowing more water to enter. Once the float reaches the full 
position, the arm presses the valve shut again.   
Education. Feedback is information about a student’s progress toward reaching a 
goal or goals (Wiggins, 2012, p. 10). Feedback is information provided by an agent 
(teacher, parent, peer, book, self, experience) regarding aspects of  one’s performance 
or understanding (Hattie and Temperley , 2007, p. 81).
J. Hattie, and H. Temperley , ‘The Power of  Feedback’, Review of  Educational Research 
77 (2007), 81–112. The article was retrieved from the Internet on 18 March, 2013.
G. Wiggins, ‘Feedback for Learning’, Educational Leadership 70 (2012), 10–16. The 
article was retrieved from the Internet on 21 February , 2013.
Class discussion: Differences in the meaning of feedback in biology , 
engineering, and education (10 minutes) 
Explain that feedback seeks to maintain stability in biology and engineering; feedback 
seeks to promote change in education.
Feedback loops are internally controlled in biology and engineering; teachers 
are interested in promoting self-assessment and self-regulation of  learning as 
students grow older, but the agents of  feedback to students are more often 
external than internal.
Negative feedback is evaluative and maladaptive (not helpful) for learning; negative 
feedback is non-evaluative and adaptive in biology and engineering.
Note and discuss differences and similarities in Student Teachers’ definitions of  
feedback and the definitions from Wiggins and Hattie and Temperley .
Presentation: Ruth Butler’s research on feedback to school students (15 minutes)
The effects of  feedback on student achievement is a thoroughly researched topic in 
the study of  learning in school.
The research findings are strong: feedback has a powerful effect on achievement,  
but that effect can be negative (lowering achievement) as well as positive  
(increasing achievement).
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
38
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Ruth Butler’s research is the focus of  this presentation because her findings are 
important and consistent.
 
NOTE: The content for this presentation is in one of the course textbooks, Embedded 
Formative Assessment (pages 108 through the first four lines of 111). This is a clear 
summary of Butler’s research and identifies the primary references. Your presentation to 
the class can be created from this text. 
There is a hypothesis about motivation in the Butler research that needs to be explained 
to the Student Teachers during your presentation. They should understand the 
distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic motivation as they have encountered those 
concepts in other courses. A more recent theory suggests that intrinsic motivation 
(internal to the person) may be expressed in two ways. Some students are motivated to 
learn because they want to become competent. They thrive on acquiring knowledge 
and new skills. These students are said to have task-involved motivation. Other students 
are motivated to work in school because they want to please and impress other people. 
They are less interested in the tasks and more interested in the impressions they make 
on other people. These students are said to have ego-involved motivation. This hypothesis 
about motivation is secondary to the reason for studying Dr Butler’s research. The 
important information in her work is that written comments by the teacher on student’s 
work had a greater influence on learning than grades alone or grades and comments. 
The purpose of  this presentation is to understand what those findings say about 
feedback to students that moves learning forward.
Volunteers from the class make ‘significant point’ presentations about the 
Butler research (2 minutes)
Ask four Student Teachers to state a significant point about the Butler research. Tell 
them to give an original point (no repetition) and keep the pace fast. 
Homework 
Have Student Teachers write a one-page, single-spaced paper on the implications of  
the Butler research for written feedback to students. Ask them to bring their papers to 
the next class. The papers will be used in class before submitting them for your review .
Session 2: Interactions between students’ beliefs about 
learning ability, motivation, and feedback
In the previous session, Student Teachers had the opportunity to see that the meaning 
of  feedback as teachers use the term is not quite true to the meaning of  feedback in 
biology and engineering, where the concept originated. Student Teachers also had 
the opportunity to learn that in carefully designed experiments that compared the 
effects of  comments on elementary school students’ work versus grades for their 
work versus comments and grades, the students learned more over a short period 
of  time when they received comments only than they when they received grades 
or comments and grades. Student Teachers also heard you say that research on the 
effects of  feedback to students is abundant but those effects are not consistently 
39
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
positive. The core description of  feedback in biology and engineering is that the 
result of  an action returns to the source of  that action and influences that action in a 
constructive way . That core concept seems relevant to education. 
T oday in class (5 minutes)
Review the following: feedback to students is powerful, but the effect is not always 
positive; studies show that learning is more likely to occur from teachers’ written 
feedback comments alone than from grades or grades and comments; the use of  
feedback in biology and engineering are not exact examples of  the way feedback is used 
in the classroom; teachers need to go beyond the common core idea about feedback and 
develop guidelines for the use of  feedback that are specific to learning in school.
Describe today’s session. First, there will be a class discussion to elicit some general 
features of  feedback. Then, Student Teachers will give each other written feedback 
practice with papers assigned for homework. There will be a second class discussion 
after practice to elicit specific features of  feedback and then homework will be assigned.
Class discussion: General features of feedback (10 minutes)
Begin with a definition of  feedback used in teaching and learning, preferably written 
on the board or chart paper. (If  the class produced a definition in the last class session, 
use that. If  not, use either the Wiggins or Hattie and Temperley definition presented 
in the last class.) The word general in the title for this discussion means features of  
feedback that people know from experience rather than studying. The features you 
are looking for are these: feedback can be written, spoken, or nonverbal; feedback can 
be given to an individual or a group; feedback can be encouraging or critical; feedback 
can be immediate or delayed; and feedback can elicit negative or positive feelings for 
the person who receives it. This short exercise is designed to prompt Student Teachers 
to think about feedback before they practice giving it. The exercise is predicated, 
in part, on the assumption that Student Teachers won’t identify content features 
of  feedback. If  someone gives a content response (for example, provides correct 
responses to incorrect answers), tell the Student Teacher you recruited to write those 
responses on board/paper in a separate place, if  there is room.
Feedback practice with homework papers (15 minutes)
Student Teachers form pairs to read and give written feedback to each other on the 
homework assignment. (Write about the implications of  Ruth Butler’s research for 
classroom practice.)
Approximately 10 minutes should be allocated for reading and writing feedback. Five 
minutes should be devoted to a discussion between the pairs about feedback given  
and received. 
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
40
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Class discussion of the feedback exercise (15 minutes)
Open the discussion by reminding students that in the first Butler study , learning was 
measured for three comparison groups: one that received feedback comments on their 
work; one that received grades; and one that received grades and feedback comments. In 
the second study , praise was an additional variable. In both studies, feedback comments 
on the first lesson was the only variable that produced evidence of  learning on the 
second lesson. A grade alone, praise alone, and feedback comments plus a grade on 
the first lesson did not raise students’ scores on the second lesson. These findings from 
research raise the question: What power to influence learning do teachers’ feedback 
comments have that isn’t shared by a grade or praise? (If  Student Teachers raise their 
hands, get a few responses but don’t expect to answer this question now .)  
 
Turn to the Student Teachers’ immediate experience with feedback. Ask: ‘Did any of  
you receive praise on your paper?’ (Record three or four responses on the board.) ‘Did 
any of  you receive direct criticism?’ (Probably not, as they may not feel safe enough 
in a classroom to criticize each other.) Open the question-response interaction to any 
type of  statement and take and record four or five responses. If  you haven’t received 
this kind of  response, ask, ‘Did any of  you get a correction?’ (Record responses, if  so.) 
‘Were any of  you asked a question on your homework papers that caused you to think 
about what you had written?’ 
If  you didn’t receive critical responses when you asked, write a few on the board (for 
example, ‘this is wrong’, ‘this is a poor sentence’, or ‘I don’t know what you mean’). 
Your next step is to help Student Teachers see that neither praise nor criticism gives 
information about why they were right or wrong. Neither type of  feedback carries 
information that will be helpful at another time in a similar situation. Return to the 
big question: ‘In these two studies, why did comments facilitate learning when grades 
and praise did not?’ It is because comments–when they are directed to the content 
of  the lesson and/or the strategies used to solve a problem–stimulate thinking and 
action. Comments can carry cues and probes that help students understand and 
correct their own mistakes. Praise alone doesn’t tell you why your work was good, 
nor does criticism alone tell you why it was bad. 
If  you haven’t received an explanation for the weak showing of  comments and grades, 
probe a little more before explaining (students with high grades don’t need to read 
comments and students with low grades don’t want to read comments). Also probe 
to find out if  any Student Teachers got the message from this research and discussion 
that grading every piece of  work might not be a good idea. Students might benefit 
more from comments on some work and grades on other work. 
Presentation on effective comments (10 minutes)
Give Student Teachers guidelines for feedback comments that facilitate learning. (Use 
the complete chapter on feedback in the Wiliam book [2011] as the content for this 
presentation.)
41
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Guidelines for feedback comments that facilitate learning:
•	 Comments are related to the learning objectives of  the lesson
•	 Comments that stimulate the student to think
•	 Comments that enable the student to take a constructive action
•	 Comments are focused on the main points of  the lesson
•	 Comments are restricted in number so the student is not overwhelmed
•	 Students take time in class to respond to the feedback comments
•	 Comments are timely
Closing (5 minutes)
Call on four students to identify one main point from today’s class (no repetition). 
Collect the homework papers and add your feedback to the Student Teachers’ feedback 
before returning them. Tell them to read pages 138–141 in the Clarke book. These pages 
show feedback integrated into a writing lesson.
Session 3: Feedback that is consistently about the task 
rather than the person may increase motivation
As you think about and conduct this session, please remember that there are several 
practice exercises in the course, especially in Unit 4. If  it fits your views about the 
purpose of  the course, most of  these practice exercises can go ungraded and be 
exchanged between pairs of  Student Teachers for practice giving feedback in the 
form of  task-oriented comments. Butler’s research is important here. (If  her findings 
can be generalized to students in Pakistan, when a grade is on the work, students are 
not inclined to read teachers’ comments on the work). If  you choose to have Student 
Teachers give each other task-oriented feedback throughout the course, you will have 
many opportunities after today to discuss feedback with them.
T oday in class (5 minutes)
Explain what will happen in the session today: 
•	 Review guidelines for feedback that facilitates learning
•	 Using the guidelines, critique feedback on a test about the solar system
•	 Role-play a belief  about fixed learning ability versus a belief  that learning   
 ability can increase
•	 Discussion of  interactions between feedback and beliefs about learning ability
•	 Summary of  the week’s lessons about feedback
Guidelines for feedback that facilitates learning (15 minutes)
•	 Feedback should be focused on the work the student did. If  feedback is being 
given on work that was done during or after a lesson, the feedback should be 
related to the lesson’s learning objective.
•	 Feedback isn’t feedback unless it leads to thinking and action by the student.
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
42
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Here is an example from a grade 6 class: 
•	 Feedback should be focused on two or three of  the most important ideas/  
 concepts/knowledge/skills in the student’s work.
•	 Feedback should be immediate (for verbal feedback) and within two    
 days (for written feedback).
•	 Students should be given time in class to act upon the teacher’s feedback.
NOTE: The five guidelines (but not necessarily the example) should be written on the 
board or chart paper. 
Critique of feedback given to Fauzia’s answers on a solar system 
unit test (40 minutes)
There are three documents for this exercise: a girl’s answers to a solar system unit 
test with teacher’s written feedback, a memo to the teacher from a member of  the 
professional development staff  in the school giving the teacher some advice about 
feedback, and the same test with the teacher’s feedback after receiving the advice. 
(This handout is ‘Teacher Feedback on the Solar System Unit Test: After Receiving 
Advice’. It has three parts that are to be given to Student Teachers sequentially . The 
directions for distributing each part are explained below .) 
There is a striking difference between the two feedback examples. In the first one, the 
teacher gives the student all the correct answers. In the second one, the teacher leads 
the student to search for correct answers for herself. This very important concept is 
the second guideline (feedback isn’t feedback unless it leads the student to think and 
act in ways that improve her or his performance). The teacher provides guidance but 
the student does the work.
The exercise was constructed with the following procedure in mind. Student Teachers 
will work in groups of  four. If  possible, each Student Teacher will receive a copy of  
the first feedback the teacher gave on the test. 
Learning objective: To learn how to create feelings of  suspense in a story 
Teacher’s feedback to a student who has written about a mountain climbing expedition: 
‘Mountain climbing is a very exciting and often dangerous activity , but I don’t feel that in 
your story . Choose one sentence from the story and create suspense with it’. 
The student chose this sentence: ‘Stuart and his climbing companions stopped on a 
ledge so their sherpas could catch up’. 
The student wrote: ‘Suddenly they heard cries from below but they couldn’t see the 
sherpas. He sensed danger and struggled to control fear. After what seemed like hours, 
one of  the sherpas came in view . He signaled that a sherpa had fallen but he wasn’t 
seriously hurt’. (This is adapted from an example in Enriching Feedback in the Primary 
Classroom, p. 97.) 
43
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Give the Student Teachers these questions:
•	 Does this feedback follow any of  the guidelines you were given today? 
•	 If  so, which?
•	 If  not, is there anything in common about the feedback comments?
•	 Who is doing the work to correct errors in this example, the student or the teacher?
Distribute the second set of  feedback comments. After the Student Teachers have had 
a chance to read them, ask:
•	 Are these comments different from the first set of  comments you read?
•	 If  so, how?
•	 If  not, is there anything in common about these feedback comments?
•	 Who is doing the work with these comments, the student or the teacher?
•	 Would you change these comments in any way? 
•	 If  so, how?
If  the Student Teachers don’t understand the main point (that is, in the first example 
the student isn’t doing anything; by giving her the answers, the teacher is doing all of  
the work, and the chance is small that that the student is learning anything), give them 
the memo from the professional development specialist to read and ask the first two 
questions in the second set of  questions again. If  the Student Teachers understand the 
difference on their own, you can give them the professional development specialist’s 
memo so they can see the secondary points in the memo (for example, grouping all 
questions with a similar error together). 
Week 3: The context for classroom 
assessment in Pakistan
Thus far in this unit, Student Teachers have been introduced to the practice of  class-
room assessment by studying definitions, standards for practice, and examples. They 
have also been introduced to an idea that grades and praise alone may not be the best 
way to provide feedback to students about the work they do in school. Class sessions 
this week should give Student Teachers the opportunity to think beyond the technical 
aspects of  classroom assessment.  
Session 1: Existing practices for assessing learning in 
schools in Pakistan
The purpose of  this session is to develop a sketch, at least, of  the practice of  assessing 
student learning in primary and secondary schools in Pakistan. If  a person from an 
appropriate district or provincial office is available, this session can be planned around 
that person’s presentation to the class. If  a speaker is not available, the session can be 
built around a faculty presentation to the class. 
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
44
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Presentation: Overview of assessment in Pakistan (15 minutes)
Try to use information from a variety of  sources for your presentation. There is a 
recent article about assessment in schools in Pakistan available on the Internet: 
S. Khattak, ‘ Assessment in Schools in Pakistan’, SA-eDUC JOURNAL, at:
 Ø http://www .nwu.ac.za/webfm_send/58399
The tone is negative, but it contains some useful information. You could also refer to 
reports by the National Education Assessment System (NAES) in Pakistan. 
Discussion (30 minutes)
Provide approximately 15 minutes for Student Teachers to discuss the presentation 
in small groups. Ask them to summarize what they heard and the findings from their 
interviews (assigned in week 1). Then select a few groups to report to the rest of  the 
class on the essential features of  assessment policy and practice in schools.
Individual work (15 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to create an outline for a 3- to 4-page paper about assessment 
policy and practice in schools in Pakistan. The paper should be a description of  policy 
and practices in schools (it is not an opinion paper). The paper should address the broad 
question regarding assessment policy and practice: ‘Who is responsible for what?’   
Homework (5 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to write a paper based on their outlines. The paper and the 
outline are due at the beginning of  the next class.
Session 2: The practice of examining student learning in 
school is influenced by people’s beliefs and values
As Professor Robin Alexander indicates, culture influences the education a society 
creates for its children (R. Alexander, Essays on Pedagogy [London: Routledge, 2008], 
p.181). Culture also influences particular practices within a system of  education. The 
purpose of  this session is to isolate some of  the cultural influences on the practice of  
examining and evaluating the academic performance of  individual students in school. 
The outcome of  this session is a table that contrasts a test-based culture in school from 
an assessment-based culture. References and the list of  contrasts used in the session 
are in McMillan, on the charts on page 15 (which identify some of  the features of  an 
assessment-based culture) and page 19 (which identify some changes from a test-based 
culture to an assessment-based culture).
Presentation and class discussion (15 minutes)
Prepare a presentation on the concept of  culture. The following is information to help 
you get started.
Culture is a concept created by anthropologists in the nineteenth century . The concept 
is used to describe or explain a variety of  social ideas; consequently , the word has 
more than one definition. In this course the term culture refers to ‘the collective ideas, 
values, customs, and relationships that shape a society’s view of  itself, the world, and 
education’ (Alexander, p. 181). Professor Alexander’s definition serves the purposes of  
45
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
this course well when extended to include these ideas: 1) the ideas, values, customs, 
and relationships that characterize a culture are transmitted from one generation to 
the next; 2) the ideas, values, customs, and relationships that characterize a culture 
form the basis for collective social action in a society; 3) culture influences human 
development through learning; and 4) one human being belongs to more than one 
culture, each culture identified in a different way (for example, by religion, ethnicity , 
language, work, and age). 
Pause in the presentation and encourage Student Teachers to contribute to a discussion 
about the meaning of  culture as a concept and word, and try to clarify misconceptions. 
Small group work with prompts (30 minute)
Create small groups (with three to four members). Explain that the task is to create 
a table that contrasts a test-based culture in the classroom with an assessment-based 
culture. Each group should create a table with two columns. The heading in one 
column is ‘People who favour a test-based culture in schools’. The heading in the 
other column is ‘People who favour an assessment-based culture in schools’. Give a 
few examples from the completed table to help them get started. Monitor their work 
and provide guidance as needed.
Groups report to class (20 minutes) 
Choose a few groups to share their tables with the class. 
Closing (5 minutes)
Collect tables from each group. Ask three volunteers to work together to create one 
table from Student Teachers’ tables and the example list and bring it to the next class 
session. Duplicate copies of  the composite table and distribute at the beginning of  the 
next session or ask the volunteers to create a large chart for display .
Homework (5 minutes)
Distribute the handout ‘List of  Contrasts between a Test-based and an Assessment-
based Culture in Schools’ and ask Student Teachers to read it before the next session.
Session 3: Imagining an assessment-based culture in 
schools in Pakistan
The difference between a test-based and an assessment-based culture in schools is 
a useful device for illustrating the influence of  culture on educational practice. The 
purpose of  including the list of  contrasts in this course is to help Student Teachers assess 
the fit between beliefs and values regarding education in Pakistan and the beliefs and 
values that typically underlie a culture of  assessment in schools.
Discussion (5 minutes)
Discuss the list of  contrasts between a test-based and an assessment-based culture in 
schools. Respond to any questions Student Teachers may have about the table.
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
46
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Small group leading to full-class discussion (20 minutes)
To the extent possible, this small to large group discussion should attempt to draw 
some conclusions about expectations for education among Pakistani citizens. If  it 
helps, Student Teachers can put themselves in the role of  a parent and ask what she or 
he wants education to do for their children. 
Small group work (20 minutes)
Student Teachers can remain in the same groups they were in during the previous 
discussion of  attitudes toward education in Pakistan. Ask each group to create a 
definition of  classroom assessment suitable for schools in Pakistan.
Closing (10 minutes)
Ask groups to read their definitions to the class. Though time will be short, try to 
draw the main points for a definition from their reports. Collect the definitions from 
each group. Ask five volunteers to work together to create one definition, write it on 
chart paper, and post it at the beginning of  the next class. It doesn’t necessarily require 
discussion in the first session of  the new unit.
 UNIT     2  ASSESSMENT IS A PROCESS 
 THAT CONNECTS 
 TEACHING AND LEARNING
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
48
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
UNIT 2: ASSESSMENT IS A PROCESS THAT 
CONNECTS TEACHING AND LEARNING
(3 weeks/9 hours)
T eaching and learning resources for Unit 2
Handouts for Students T eachers
Week 4
‘Unit 2, Week 4, Session 1: Sun, Earth, and the Moon Unit: Student Teachers’ Copy’
Week 5
‘Unit 2, Week 5, Session 1: Forms for Recording Student Participation in  
Classroom Discussions’
‘Unit 2, Week 5, Session 3: Grade 3 Mathematics in Pakistan’s 2006 National Curriculum’
Resources for faculty
Week 4
‘Unit 2, Week 4, Session 1: Sun, Earth, and the Moon Unit: Instructor’s Copy’
‘Unit 2, Week 4, Session 2: Guide for Using the Sun, Earth, and the Moon Unit’
Week 5
‘Unit 4, Week 14, Session 1: The Assessment Tracker’
Readings
Week 4
•	 Clarke, pp. 92–117
•	 McMillan, pp. 28–36
•	 Miller, Linn, and Gronlund, pp. 47–70
•	 Stiggins, Arter, Chappius, and Chappius, pp. 53–80
•	 Wiliam, pp. 51–69
 
Week 6
•	 McMillan, pp. 69–82
•	 Miller, Linn, and Gronlund, pp. 71, 86–87, 71–72, 109–110
 
49
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 4: Learning objectives, learning 
targets, and success criteria
Session 1: Introduction to learning objectives, learning 
targets, and success criteria
In class today (10 minutes)
Tell Student Teachers that one of  the most important tasks in creating assessment-embedded 
lessons is to set learning objectives, learning targets, and success criteria for a lesson. 
Inform Student Teachers that in textbooks about assessment, the terms learning goals, 
learning objectives and learning targets are often used interchangeably (to mean similar 
things). In this unit they are introduced as different concepts that mean different 
things in the assessment process. Their differences and meaning will be clarified 
through the use of  an example of  a seven-lesson unit and the accompanying activities 
included in this week’s sessions.
Also tell Student Teachers that success criteria is a relatively new term. It refers to the 
specific knowledge or skill that a student must demonstrate to show that she or he has 
mastered the lesson targets. 
Use a short class discussion to check Student Teachers’ previous knowledge of  learning 
objectives, learning targets, success criteria, and formative assessments. Ask if  they have ever 
come across these terms. If  yes, in what context? 
Encourage Student Teachers to describe these four terms in their own words and to write 
down the descriptions in their notebooks. Take a few responses and note them on the 
board. At this point in the session, Student Teachers will need the handout ‘ Assessment in a 
Lesson about the Solar System’ (shared with Student Teachers in Unit 1).
Lecture on learning objectives, learning targets, success criteria, 
and formative assessments (15 minutes)
When describing the definitions of learning objectives, learning targets, success criteria, 
and formative assessments, try to include the Student Teachers’ definitions of  these 
concepts as much as possible.
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
50
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Cover the following concepts in this lecture:
•	 Learning objectives, learning targets, and success criteria are important pillars  
 of  assessment components of  the lesson. 
•	 Definition of  learning goals, learning objectives, learning targets, and success criteria:
¡¡ Learning goals: Learning goals are broad statements included at the unit level 
to describe the topics covered in the unit and are the first step in building the 
unit, lesson, and assessments within a unit. Learning goals are usually outlined 
in the curriculum a teacher is expected to implement. For the ‘Sun, Earth, and 
the Moon’ unit used in this course, the learning goal is stated as ‘Students will 
be able to explain the relationships between the Sun, Earth, and the Moon and 
the effect of  these relationships on life on the Earth’.
¡¡ Learning objectives: A learning objective is the knowledge and/or skill a 
student is expected to learn from a lesson. Learning objectives in each lesson 
are either essential (must be achieved to achieve the goal of  the unit) or 
supportive (introduce students to the broader vision of  the unit).
¡¡ Learning targets: Learning objectives that are essential to achieve the 
goal of  the unit are called learning targets. In other words, learning targets 
represent main learning objectives of  a lesson and leave out the supporting 
learning objectives. 
¡¡ Success criteria: Success criteria are written in action verb format and 
describe what a student should be able to do in order to show that they 
have mastered the learning targets for the lesson. (Direct Student Teachers’ 
attention to the handout that is the first lesson in the solar system unit. 
Remind them of  the goal of  the unit and ask them to cover the learning 
targets with a book or their hand and pick out the essential objectives from 
the list of  learning objectives. Discuss any differences between the students’ 
responses and the lesson targets in the lesson plan. Tell Student Teachers to 
cover the success criteria. Lead them though the same exercise they did with 
the learning objectives and learning targets. Remind them that there isn’t 
one right way to make a lesson plan including the objectives, targets, and 
success criteria. For example, some teachers might argue that given the goal 
of  this unit, being able to name and locate all eight planets is a supportive 
rather than essential learning objective).  
¡¡ Formative assessment: Formative assessment is assessment conducted 
during a lesson to get evidence about learning that gives feedback to 
students and the teacher that is used to improve teaching and learning.
Group discussion on the process of setting up learning objectives, 
learning targets, and success criteria (30 minutes)
NOTE: The faculty should consult the ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon Unit: Instructor’s 
Copy’ handout for complete lesson plans with all the learning objectives, learning 
targets, success criteria, and formative assessments for all seven lesson plans.
In this activity , Student Teachers will take a look at the ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon 
Unit: Student Teachers’ Copy’ to understand the process of  setting learning objec-
tives, learning targets, and success criteria. (Tell Student Teachers to put the lesson 
51
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
from the unit that they took from their notebooks earlier back into their notebooks. 
That lesson is a duplicate of  the first of  the seven lessons they will use from now on.)
Tell Student Teachers that there are many different ways of  creating assessment-
embedded lessons. Different teachers create different lesson/assessment plan formats. 
They will develop their own way after some experience in the classroom. 
This session previews one of  the ways of  creating assessment-embedded lessons and is 
by no means the only one.
Divide Student Teachers into groups of  three or four and provide them with a copy 
of  the ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon Unit: Student Teachers’ Copy’ handout. Give 
the groups 10 to 15 minutes to take a look at the unit learning goal and learning 
objectives, learning targets, and success criteria for lessons 1, 2, and 7. At this time, 
Student Teachers do not need to study the whole unit. 
Ask the groups to discuss and write down the order and process in which (they think) 
that the learning objectives, learning targets, and success criteria are set up.
NOTE: Make sure Student T eachers understand that the learning goal is the broader topic, 
which is often provided to teachers in a curriculum guide (or any other source a school is 
using as a guide for creating instruction).
This discussion should bring up the following points: 
•	 The first step in creating assessment-embedded lessons is to study the learning 
goal or goals (provided in the curriculum, and they may be presented under a 
different name).
•	 After studying the learning goals for a unit, break them down into learning 
objectives. 
•	 Based on the length of  the class session, decide how many learning objectives 
can be covered in one class session. While deciding this, try to group learning 
objectives covering similar topics into one session. If  there are more similar 
learning objectives than one session can cover, spread them over two or even 
three class sessions.
•	 Now separate the learning objectives that are essential to understanding the 
lesson and unit in question. These will be your learning targets.
•	 Now convert the learning targets into success criteria by using action verbs. 
If  the Student Teachers do not bring these points up themselves, make sure to go over 
and explain them. 
Explain that in order to write strong success criteria, it is important to make sure 
that they are easily measurable. Because success criteria form the basis for creating 
assessments for the lesson as well as the unit, their measurability shows the teacher if  
the students have mastered the essential learning objectives.
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
52
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
The groups should also discuss the significance of  and difference between learning 
objectives, learning targets, and success criteria. 
After the groups are done with their discussion, ask a volunteer to share their 
discussion points with the rest of  the class. Note down these discussion points on the 
blackboard and make additions or corrections if  needed.
Ask Student Teachers to correct their responses if  needed. 
Closing (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to reflect on the classroom activities for this session and, 
using their course notebooks, write about their understanding of  the learning goals, 
learning objectives, learning targets, and success criteria in their own words. Student 
Teachers should also reflect on the importance of  setting precise learning objectives, 
learning targets, and success criteria to writing assessment-embedded lesson plans.
Collect Student Teachers’ notebooks at the end of  the session and read them to get an 
idea of  Student Teachers’ understanding of  learning objectives, learning targets, and 
success criteria. 
Homework
Ask Student Teachers to take home the handout ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon Unit: Student 
Teachers’ Copy’ and to read through the whole unit so that they are familiar with it. 
Session 2: Practice with learning objectives, learning 
targets, and success criteria
In class today (5 minutes)
In this session and the next session, Student Teachers practice writing the learning 
objectives, learning targets, success criteria, and formative assessments (pertaining to 
success criteria) for lessons 2 and 3 from the ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’ unit and will 
be using the ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon Unit: Student Teachers’ Copy’ handout. 
Tell Student Teachers that in this and the next session, they will be working backward 
in that they will study lessons 2, 3, 5, and 6 in detail first and then write their learning 
objectives, learning targets, and success criteria for these lessons.
In real life, the Student Teachers will write the learning objectives, learning targets, 
and success criteria first (using the learning goals) and then create the lesson activities 
and assessments. Even though this exercise does not mirror reality , it is set up to help 
Student Teachers become familiar with and get practice in using the correct language 
format to write assessment-embedded lessons and units.
53
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Discussion on the relationship between learning objectives, learning targets, 
success criteria, and formative assessments (pertaining to success criteria) 
of the lessons (15 minutes)
Divide the Student Teachers into groups of  two or three and ask them to take some 
time to study lessons 1, 4, and 7 in their entirety . They should focus on the relationship 
between the learning objectives, learning targets, success criteria, and lesson activities. 
The Student Teachers should also pay special attention to the relationship between 
success criteria and the assessments marked as ‘formative assessments’ in the lessons.
Make sure the Student Teachers know that the assessments marked as ‘formative 
assessments’ are not the only formative assessments used in the lessons. Formative 
assessments are spread throughout the lessons. Even though most explorations and 
guiding questions serve as formative assessments for this unit, the sections especially 
marked as ‘formative assessment’ cover the success criteria of  the lessons. 
Ask Student Teachers to discuss the relationship between the learning objectives, 
learning targets, success criteria, and formative assessments (pertaining to success 
criteria) by going over following points:
•	 Do the learning objectives relate to the content covered in the lessons?
•	 Are the learning targets chosen well? Do you think they are essential to 
understanding the lessons? Are there any learning targets that are left out?
•	 Do the success criteria represent the learning targets? Are there any learning 
targets that are left out?
•	 Do the assessment activities marked as ‘formative assessment’ test the success 
criteria well? Are there any assessment activities that are inefficient in assessing 
the success criteria?
After the Student Teachers have discussed these questions, take a few responses from 
the class and conduct a short discussion on the above-mentioned discussion points. 
Encourage Student Teachers with different opinions to participate in the discussion. 
Activity in writing learning objectives, learning targets, success criteria, 
and formative assessments (25 minutes)
In this activity , Student Teachers will practice writing the learning objectives, learning 
targets, success criteria, and formative assessments (pertaining to success criteria) for 
lesson 2 from the ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’ unit and will be using the ‘Sun, Earth, 
and the Moon Unit: Student Teachers’ Copy’ handout.
NOTE: This task is explained in detail in the ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon Unit: Instructor’s 
Copy’ handout. Please consult the guide to the unit before explaining the task to the 
Student T eachers. 
Tell the Student Teachers that now that they understand the relationships between 
learning objectives, learning targets, success criteria, formative assessments (based on 
success criteria), and the lesson content, they will practice writing them. 
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
54
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Divide Student Teachers into pairs. These can be called the work pairs and will remain 
the same for this and the next session. Ask the work pairs to study lesson 2 from the 
‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’ unit. After studying the lesson, Student Teachers should 
write three to five learning objectives for the lesson.
Ask Student Teachers to pick two learning objectives from the list and write them as 
learning targets (two to four).
Next, the Student Teachers should write success criteria for each learning target. 
Advise them not to write more than three per target and remind them that success 
criteria should be easily measurable and written using verbs to denote an action. 
After Student Teachers have written objectives and success criteria, ask them to do 
two things:
1) Look through the guiding questions and the culminating activities in the lesson 
to find questions and activities that can produce evidence that students have met 
criteria for achieving one or more of  the lesson’s learning targets. They should 
note which success criteria the assessment question or activity is measuring.
2) They should try to write a new question or activity that can produce evidence 
that students have met criteria for achieving one or more of  the lesson’s 
learning targets. They should note which success criteria the assessment 
question or activity is measuring.
Feedback activity (15 minutes)
In this activity , Student Teachers will swap their lessons and give each other feedback 
on the quality and language of  learning objectives, learning targets, success criteria, 
and formative assessments (pertaining to success criteria).
Ask each Student Teacher to find a different partner (from another work pair group). 
These groups can be called the feedback pairs and will remain the same for this and 
the next session. After forming the feedback pairs, Student Teachers will swap their 
lessons with each other. 
The pair should use the first five minutes to study the other person’s work and the 
next five minutes to provide feedback to the other person. The Student Teachers in 
feedback pairs should provide each other with written feedback and discuss any issues 
they might have with their peer’s feedback.
Tell the Student Teachers that they will continue this activity in the next session.
Closing (5 minutes)
Explain the homework assignment and give the work groups some time to make 
arrangements to meet each other after class to work on the assignment.
55
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Homework
Student Teachers will work in same work group pairs to write learning objectives, 
learning targets, success criteria, and formative assessments (pertaining to success 
criteria) for lesson 3 of  the ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’ unit. 
Instruct Student Teachers to use the same set of  directions they used for lesson 2 from 
this session’s last activity to accomplish the task.
Collect lesson 3 from the Student Teachers at the beginning of  the next session to 
review their work and provide feedback.
Session 3: Practice with learning objectives, learning 
targets, and success criteria (continued)
In class today (5 minutes)
Tell the Student Teachers that they will continue to practice writing learning 
objectives, learning targets, success criteria, and formative assessments (pertaining to 
success criteria). Before class, write the significant features of  effective feedback on 
the board and direct attention to the list as a review for the work they are going to do 
together (providing each other with feedback).
Feedback activity continued (15 minutes)
Ask the Student Teachers to sit next to their feedback pair partner because they are 
continuing the feedback activity from the previous session. The feedback pair will 
continue providing each other feedback on learning objectives, learning targets, success 
criteria, and formative assessments (pertaining to success criteria) for lesson 2.
The groups should provide each other with written feedback and discuss any issues 
they might have with their peer’s feedback.
After discussing and resolving the issues, Student Teachers from the feedback pairs 
should go to their work pair partner. At this point, both Student Teachers in the work 
pair will have feedback on their lessons. The work pair should combine their feedback 
and incorporate it into their lesson. 
Activity writing learning objectives, learning targets, success criteria, 
and formative assessments (25 minutes)
In this activity , Student Teachers will continue to practice writing the learning 
objectives, learning targets, success criteria, and formative assessments (pertaining 
to success criteria) for lesson 5 from the ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’ unit and will be 
using the ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon Unit: Student Teachers’ Copy’ handout.
Student Teachers will work with the same work pair partner and use the same 
procedure (explained in the previous session) as lessons 2 and 3 to complete this task.
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
56
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Feedback activity (15 minutes)
Return Student Teachers’ lesson 3 (with written feedback) and ask each work pair 
group to study their feedback in detail and incorporate it into their work.
While groups are working on studying and incorporating feedback, visit each group 
to resolve any issues they might have with the feedback or provide any help they 
might need.
Closing (3 minutes)
Explain the homework assignment to Student Teachers and give the work pair groups some 
time to make arrangements to meet each other after class to work on the assignment.
Homework
Student Teachers will work in the same work pairs from the previous activity to 
write learning objectives, learning targets, success criteria, and formative assessments 
(pertaining to success criteria) for lesson 6 of  the ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’ unit. 
Instruct Student Teachers to use the same set of  directions they used for lessons 2, 3, 
and 5 to accomplish the task.
Collect lesson 5 from Student Teachers at the beginning of  the next session to review 
their work and provide written feedback.
 
Week 5: Recording assessment data
Classroom teaching involves continuous interaction between one teacher and many 
students. This fact creates a challenge for classroom teachers who want to use a 
variety of  assessment tools and track students’ progress (learning) over time. Frequent 
assessment focused on monitoring the effects of  instruction and students’ progress in 
school requires keeping records that are more detailed than grade books. The challenge 
for teachers is to develop record-keeping procedures that do not take excessive time 
from teaching and that do not make excessive homework for teachers. This challenge 
can be met by 1) focusing assessment on learning objectives that represent significant 
educational goals, 2) teaching students to keep their own records for some learning 
objectives, and 3) developing efficient record-keeping procedures.
There are three outcomes that Student Teachers should expect from this week’s course 
work. First, they should expect to learn how to use a procedure for documenting 
student participation in classroom discussions. Then they should have a brief  and candid 
discussion of  their current opinions about using it or a similar assessment procedure 
when they are teachers. Second, after a discussion, they should record the ways students 
can participate in keeping records of  their progress in school. Finally , they should have 
an example that they created of  a whole-class record-keeping procedure for learning 
objectives attained in math.
57
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Remember, assessment is a series of  interrelated decision/action components that 
lead to a specific result. This unit is about three of  those interrelated components: 
setting clear assessment targets and success criteria, gathering evidence about learning 
from students and the teacher, and interpreting that evidence before making decisions 
and taking action. Records preserve evidence of  learning so it can be interpreted. 
Some assessment tools produce their own records: written tests, for example. Other 
assessment tools need a separate document to preserve the evidence they produce: 
oral questions and answers, for example.
  
Session 1: One way to record individual participation in 
class discussions
The following activities are suggestions for conducting this session.
Ask Student Teachers to form groups of  three and choose a reporter/recorder.
Distribute the forms for documenting participation in class discussions (handout 
‘Forms for Recording Student Participation in Classroom Discussions’) and ask them 
to work together to figure out how to use them. 
After a time interval that you believe is appropriate, bring them back together as a 
class. Select a few groups to give a report back.
Have one group report on one of  the three forms that can be used to document 
student participation in class discussions.
If  the reporters make an error in describing how the form is to be used, you can ask 
for corrections from other class members using the notes describing how the forms 
are to be used. Correct from your notes, if  necessary .
When you believe that Student Teachers know how to use the forms, send them 
back to their groups to talk about ways the data collected on the form might be used 
to alter the way class discussions are conducted. In particular, the Student Teachers’ 
small group discussions should focus on how teachers can encourage participation by 
students who are reluctant to contribute to discussions.
Bring class members back together and ask reporters from the groups that didn’t 
report earlier to share their groups’ discussion about using data from an assessment 
procedure such as the individual participation record to alter instruction.
Keep class members together (rather than forming groups) and ask for recommendations 
about changing the student participation form. 
If  Student Teachers have good recommendations, tell class members to note those 
recommendations in their course notebooks.
End the session by eliciting opinions about the value of  the data this form might produce.
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
58
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Session 2: Students’ participation in recording evidence 
of learning
The following activities are suggestions for conducting this session.
Give Student Teachers approximately 10 minutes to study their course notes and the 
handouts they were given that are examples of  assessments (handouts ‘ Assessment 
Helps Asim Gain Weight’, ‘ Assessment in Ms Khan’s Grade 4 Class’, and ‘ Assessment in 
a Lesson about the Solar System’). Tell them to concentrate on the procedures in these 
examples that are used for recording assessment data.
After each member of  the class has reviewed their course notes and handouts, 
tell them to form groups of  three, choose a reporter, and talk about the recording 
procedures in the examples. They should distinguish between those procedures used 
by students from those used by a teacher. Tell them to think of  additional ways that 
students can keep track of  their progress learning (for example, assessment folders, in 
which they put homework assignments, quizzes, essays, and drawings. This would be 
a portfolio created to show ‘evidence of  learning’).
Bring Student Teachers together as a class so that each group can share their 
recommendations for procedures that primary school students can use to keep records 
of  learning for themselves. Remind Student Teachers to make a list in their notebooks 
(annotated, if  possible) of  the procedures primary school students can use to keep 
records that show evidence of  learning.
Tell Student Teachers that, if  they choose to have their students keep assessment 
folders, the primary school students will have to explain in a short written comment 
how each of  the documents in that folder shows ‘evidence of  learning’. Tell them they 
will learn more about those explanations in Week 10 of  the course, when they study 
the creation of  portfolios.
Session 3: Constructing a class record to record the 
achievement of selected mathematics learning objectives
The following activities are suggestions for conducting this session.
Tell Student Teachers that they are going to construct a form for keeping a class 
record of  performance on a 12-item math quiz for students in grade 3. Tell them that, 
while they are going to select the topics for the 12 questions, they will not write the 
test questions and will not construct the test. 
Using an overhead projector, if  you can, show them the ‘ Assessment Tracker’ handout 
from Week 14. 
NOTE: Student T eachers are going to learn how to use the assessment tracker during 
Week 14. All they need to know now is what a class record looks like (as opposed to an 
individual record). They also need to know that their record form will be different from 
the assessment tracker in a very important way. They will have many fewer items (12 as 
opposed to 35), and they will put the items in the row across the top of the form rather 
than number the items, as in the assessment tracker.
59
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Announce that each group of  three will produce one record form and that it will be 
due at the beginning of  the first class session in Week 6. They will begin working on it 
today and finish it as a homework assignment. 
If  they haven’t already done so, ask them to form into their working groups.
Again, using an overhead projector, if  possible, show them Table 9.2 from the book by 
Stiggins, Arter, Chappius, and Chappius (page 289). Tell them you are showing this to 
illustrate what you mean when you say that rather than specifying the number of  the 
question in the row (or rows) across the top, they should identify the math problem 
that would be on the quiz.
Distribute the handout from the National Curriculum 2006 (‘Grade 3 Mathematics in 
Pakistan’s National Curriculum’). 
Tell Student Teachers to use topics from Pakistan’s National Curriculum in the form 
they create. Ask for questions. Then give them time (30 minutes) to work. Tell them 
to select the math topics and create a draft of  the form.
Bring the class back together and have each group share their quiz topics with the rest 
of  the class. Ask if  they have questions about the form and remind them when it is 
due at the end of  the session.
 
Week 6: Interpreting assessment data
Week 6 does not have any handout exercises and bases its content on reading from 
McMillan (pages 69–82) and Miller, Linn, and Gronlund (pages 71, 86–87, 71–72, 
109–110). Instructors design their own activities to teach the concepts covered in the 
assigned readings and the course guide outline for week 6. It is important to make 
connections between this week and the previous week (week 5). 
Tell the Student Teachers that last week they learned about different ways of 
collecting assessment data. This week, they will study ways of  interpreting the 
collected assessment data. Remind them that without interpretation, collected data 
is useless. Interpreting assessment data (collected using various methods) helps a 
teacher tailor instruction to students’ needs. While designing activities for week 6, 
the Instructors should be aware of  the following.
Session 1
Build this session around the following ideas.
Test scores do not lead directly to educational decisions. Instead, educational decisions 
are made and actions are taken on the basis of  interpretations of  test scores.
Interpretations and conclusions made from test scores should be valid and reliable. 
Provide and discuss the definitions of  validity and reliability.
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
60
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Validity and reliability are not properties of  tests but interpretations that derive 
from test scores.
The following connections to week 14 should be made:
•	 Teachers use different tools to interpret assessment data. One of  these tools   
 presented in this course is called the assessment tracker.
•	 Give a brief  definition of  assessment tracker  (see Week 14, Session 1 for  
 the definition).
Session 2
Build this session around the following ideas.
Test scores can be interpreted using different frames of  reference. Use this session to 
introduce Student Teachers to the following concepts:
•	 Norm-referenced frame of  reference
•	 Criterion-referenced frame of  reference
•	 Self-referenced frame of  reference
•	 Other names for norm-referenced and criterion-referenced interpretations of    
 students’ scores on assessment tasks
¡¡ Relative interpretations (comparable to norm-referenced interpretations)
¡¡ Absolute interpretations (comparable to criterion-referenced interpretations)
Give an explanation for each of  these interpretations of  performance.
(Consult week 11, session 3 for further explanation of  norm-referenced and criterion 
referenced tests.)
Session 3
Now that Student Teachers understand the connection between assessment and 
instruction, ask them to display their understanding by drawing a diagram of  the 
assessment process. Divide them into groups of  two or three to work on the diagram 
and ask each group to present the diagram to the class. 
After the groups have presented their diagrams, conduct a class discussion to endorse 
one diagram or to create a diagram from parts of  the various groups’ diagrams. (At 
this point, show Student Teachers the diagram on page 7 of  James McMillan’s book so 
they can use an assessment specialist’s diagram as a tool in refining their diagrams.)
 UNIT     3 ASSESSMENT TOOLS 
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
62
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
UNIT 3: ASSESSMENT TOOLS
(4 weeks/12 hours)
T eaching and learning resources for Unit 3
Handouts for Student T eachers
Week 9
‘Unit 3, Week 9, Session 1: Performance-based Assessment’
‘Unit 3, Week 9, Session 1: The Green Bean Competition’ (PowerPoint presentation)
Week 10
‘Unit 3, Week 10, Session 1: The Professional Portfolio’
‘Unit 3, Week 10, Session 1: National Professional Standards for Teachers in Pakistan 
(NPSTP): Standard 1 Subject Matter Knowledge’ 
‘Unit 3, Week 10, Session 1: National Professional Standards for Teachers in Pakistan 
(NPSTP): Standard 4 Assessment’ 
Resources for faculty
Week 8
‘Unit 4, Week 12, Session 3: Guidelines for Writing Test Questions’
Week 9
‘Unit 3, Week 9, Session 1: Performance-based Assessment’
Readings
Week 7
•	 McMillan, pp. 103–120
•	 Miller, Linn, and Gronlund, pp. 117–119, 268–279, 309–315
Week 8
•	 McMillan, pp. 202–215
•	 Miller, Linn, and Gronlund, pp. 232–250
•	 Stiggins, Arter, Chappius, and Chappius, pp. 167–186 
Week 9
•	 McMillan, pp. 220–252
•	 Stiggins, Arter, Chappius, and Chappius, pp. 189–230
Week 10
•	 McMillan, pp. 256–276
•	 Miller, Linn, and Gronlund, pp. 282–303
•	 Stiggins, Arter, Chappius, and Chappius, pp. 335–355
63
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 7: Interviewing teachers about 
assessment
Session 1: Constructing an interview form 
In class today (5 minutes)
This week they will conduct an interview with a teacher asking about her or his 
perceptions and beliefs about assessment. Today , they will construct the interview 
form or tool.
Give the class this outline for today:
•	 Presentation about the purpose of  the interview . Review questions and format  
 for the teacher interview about assessment 
•	 Design an interview form for a teacher interview about assessment
•	 Preparing for the interview
Presentation: The interview (5–10 minutes)
Content for the presentation is here for your consideration. The information you 
actually present and the way you present it is your choice.
Interviews and questionnaires are similar informal assessment procedures. They are used 
in classroom assessment to obtain factual information and opinions and beliefs from those 
with the most interest in what happens in the classroom: students, teachers, and parents. 
Interviews have an advantage over questionnaires in that the interviewer can probe and 
get below the surface of  the initial response. One disadvantage to both procedures is that 
responses can be biased and the interviewer may not know it. Also, responses are not 
standardized, and thus it is harder to compare answers from people who participate in 
the same interview . Despite this, interviews can be used with individuals and with small 
groups (such as focus groups). The primary purpose of  this interview is to give Student 
Teachers practice creating the questions and form for an interview . 
The secondary purpose of  the interview is to introduce Student Teachers to 
classroom teachers’ knowledge, opinions, and attitudes toward assessment. Each 
Student Teacher will only interview one teacher. Because interview responses are 
intended to be individualized rather than standardized, it is difficult to draw reliable 
conclusions about the topic from a collection of  individual responses. 
However, there will be approximately 25 teachers interviewed in each college or university 
class, and so, if  they look at all of  the data collected, they may be able draw some 
conclusions about this group of  teachers and their opinions and beliefs about assessment. 
They may find, for example, that all the teachers they interview equate assessment with 
testing. Or they may find that all the teachers equate feedback with praise. 
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
64
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Discussing a format and questions (15 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers what information they want to collect about the teacher before 
they start asking questions. 
Student Teacher responses may include background information such as the teacher’s 
name (optional), date, school (optional), teacher’s grade and/or subject(s), number of  
students in the class, number of  years of  teaching experience, preparation for teaching 
(degree), and assessment course(s) taken and when. 
Ask Student Teachers which questions they might include on their interview form. 
Possible questions include: 
•	 Do you assess children’s learning? Why do you assess learning? How do you   
 assess their learning? How often do you assess learning?
•	 Some people say that assessment is part of  teaching. Do you agree? Why? Why not?
•	 Do you keep records of  assessment? What records do you keep? 
•	 Do you give tests? How often? How do you prepare a test? Do you think   
 students should be allowed to mark each other’s tests?
•	 Do you make adjustments in your teaching based on assessment? Can you give  
 me an example? 
•	 What does feedback mean to you? Please give me an example of  feedback you   
 might give to a student in your class. How do you give feedback?
•	 Do children in your class assess their own learning? Can you give me an example? 
You might want to provide a set of  questions for Student Teachers to choose from to 
help them get started. 
Advise Student Teachers to avoid asking too many questions and to think carefully 
about the sequence of  questions. 
Encourage them to prepare probes to initial questions so that they receive detailed 
responses; for example, ‘Tell me more about what you mean by …,’ ‘Can you give me 
an example?’, and ‘Why do you say that?’ Finally , remind them to provide plenty of  
space on their forms to write the teacher’s full response. 
Drafting the interview form (30 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to design their interview form. 
Review the forms they design and encourage them to seek feedback from peers. 
Preparing for the interview (10 minutes)
Explain to Student Teachers that they should all plan to interview a teacher. They 
should work in pairs, and while one Student Teacher asks questions, the other should 
record the responses. However, a teacher should only be interviewed once, so each 
Student Teacher needs to interview a different teacher. 
65
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Remind Student Teachers to conduct the interview when students are not in the 
classroom so the teacher’s attention isn’t divided between responsibilities to them and 
to the Student Teacher. The interview should last no more than 15–20 minutes. 
Explain to Student Teachers to be careful not to evoke negative feelings on the part 
of  the teacher. They can tell the teacher that they are doing this to practice writing 
questions for an interview and creating a form on which to record responses to the 
interviewer’s questions. The Student Teacher can remind the teacher that they are not 
judging the teacher’s responses. There are no right or wrong answers.
Finally , remind them that they will need two copies of  their interview form: one to 
ask questions from and another on which to record responses.
Session 2: Conducting the interview 
Arrange for Student Teachers to be in schools on this day carrying out  
their interviews.
Session 3: Reviewing the data—What did you learn?
In class today (5 minutes)
Explain that in this session Student Teachers will discuss data from the interviews; the 
second half  is used to discuss data from the observation:
•	 Small group discussion of  responses to the interview questions
•	 Class discussion of  responses to the interview questions
•	 Critique of  the interview tool
•	 Homework assignment
•	 Closing
Small group discussion of responses to the interview questions (20 minutes)
Student Teachers form groups of  five and choose one person to report to the class. 
The group discussion centres on teachers’ responses to the big questions about the 
meaning of  assessment and feedback. Discussion should also include questions and 
concerns about the interview tool, both its questions and format. There isn’t much 
time, so the discussion needs to move fast.
Class discussion of responses to the interview questions (20 minutes)
A selection of  the following questions can shape the discussion:
•	 Did anyone get an answer with which they strongly agreed? Tell the answer.
•	 Did anyone get an answer with which they strongly disagreed? Tell us.
•	 Are these answers consistent or inconsistent with what you are learning in   
 this course?
•	 Did you get the impression that teachers value tests? Do they make their own?
•	 Can you tell from their responses if  the teachers use information about their 
students’ knowledge and skills to make decisions about teaching? For example, 
do they check on prior knowledge before they begin to teach a new topic?
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
66
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
•	 Did the interview cause you to feel that you may have a different attitude 
toward assessment and different skills from other teachers working in the 
school where you are hired to teach after you graduate?
•	 If  so, will that be a particular challenge for you?
•	 What will you do about the challenge, if  it exists?
Critique of the interview tool (10 minutes)
Remind Student Teachers about the limitations of  open-ended interviews as a method 
of  collecting information. One challenge is that the same question can produce 20 
different responses from 20 interviewees, so it can be difficult to generalize across a set 
of  data collected—especially when responses are very different.
Interviews can be biased. Respondents often say what they think an interviewer wants 
to hear. Questions and probes must be selected carefully so as to avoid bias or leading 
respondents to a particular answer. For example, an interview on the same topic as the 
Student Teachers’ would not begin with a question such as ‘Why do you do assessment?’ 
because it must first be established that the teacher actually does assessment.
On the other hand, interviews produce rich, descriptive data that can be very revealing 
and interesting.
Ask Student Teachers if  they think interviews have a place in assessing children’s 
learning in the classroom. Is this a technique they would use to find out what children 
understand or know , or believe about a topic?
Closing (5 minutes)
Call on five Student Teachers and ask each to give an original statement or question 
(with no repetitions) representing the most important fact, concept, or uncertainty 
they encountered during this week’s class sessions.
Week 8: Essay questions—Measuring 
complex achievement
Week 8 does not have any handout exercises and bases its content on reading from 
McMillan (pages 202–215), Miller, Linn, and Gronlund (pages 232–250), Stiggins, 
Arter, Chappius, and Chappius (pages 167–186). 
The absence of  handouts makes it possible for Instructors to design their own 
activities to teach the concepts covered in the assigned readings and the course guide 
outline for week 8. It is important to make connections between this week and the 
previous week (week 7). 
67
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Tell Student Teachers that this week they will continue to study the assessment tools. 
This week will focus on essay questions, which are more challenging to create and 
mark as compared to the assessment tools studied last week but are very useful for 
assessing complex achievement. Tell Student Teachers that in week 16 of  the course 
they will be asked to write essay questions for this course to help them prepare for the 
final exam; thus, they should start paying special attention to course topics and skills 
that can be better measured by essay questions. 
Session 1
In addition to using the assigned readings and the course guide, consult the handout 
‘Guidelines for Writing Test Questions’ and refer to the ‘essay questions’ section of  
the handout. Design an activity that includes working with this handout to teach the 
following concepts:
•	 Definition of  short-answer essays (restricted-response questions)
•	 Definition of  longer-answer essays (extended-response questions)
Use assigned readings for week 8 to design learning activities to cover the following:
•	 Learning goals that can be measured by short-answer essays
•	 Learning goals that can be measured by longer-answer essays
•	 Advantages and disadvantages of  essay tests
Session 2
In addition to using the assigned readings for this week, use the handout ‘Guidelines 
for Writing Test Questions’ to teach Student Teachers about the following concepts:
•	 Guidelines for writing essay questions
•	 Practice writing essay questions
The following connection can be made with week 16: Design a classroom activity 
or homework assignment for Student Teachers that requires writing essay questions 
using the content from any week from this course. 
Session 3
Use readings assigned for this week to teach Student Teachers about guidelines for 
scoring essay questions. 
During week 16, when Student Teachers are expected to write essay questions for a 
final examination for this course, they are asked to write a sample answer for an essay 
question. Discuss this practice with them so they are familiar with the idea of  writing 
model answers to use when grading essay questions.
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
68
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Week 9: Performance-based assessment 
(project-based assessment)
Student Teachers must prepare in advance for session 1, week 9. 
At the end of  the previous session, provide each Student Teacher with the 
‘Performance-based Assessment’ handout and an example of  a student group 
PowerPoint presentation for ‘The Green Bean Competition’.
Before the first class of  this week, Students Teachers should have read ‘Performance-
based Assessment’ and the PowerPoint presentation ‘The Green Bean Competition’.
The Instructor as well as Student Teachers need to prepare for this class. Before class 
write these definitions of  performance assessment on chart paper (or choose other 
definitions that you prefer): 
Performance assessment requires students to demonstrate knowledge and skills, 
including the process by which they solve problems. (Project Appleseed)
Any assessment strategy designed to estimate a child’s knowledge, understanding, 
ability , skill, and/or attitudes in a consistent fashion across individuals emphasizing 
methods other than standardized achievement tests, particularly those using multiple-
choice formats. Performance-based assessments typically include exhibitions, 
investigations, demonstrations, written or oral responses, journals, and portfolios. 
(New York State Education Department)
A set of  strategies for the...application of  knowledge, skills, and work habits 
through the performance of  tasks that are meaningful and engaging to students’. 
(K. M. Hibbard, A Teacher’s Guide to Performance-Based Learning and Assessment)
Session 1: Introduction to performance-based assessment
In class today (10 minutes)
This week, Student Teachers will learn about performance-based assessment tasks, 
what goes into creating them, and how to use them in class to measure learning. 
Tell Student Teachers that they will study and interact with two examples of  
performance-based assessment projects, one extended task (three weeks) and one 
short-duration task (three to four days).
69
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Have a short class discussion to check Student Teachers understanding of  
performance-based assessment by asking the following question: ‘Have you heard 
the term performance-based assessment? If  yes, in what context?’ After giving Student 
Teachers a minute or two to respond, share the definitions on the charts.  
To check Student Teachers’ understanding, discuss a few examples of  performance 
assessment that will be familiar to them.
Advance preparation for the next session
Provide each Student Teacher with the ‘Performance-based Assessment’ handout and 
the example of  a student group PowerPoint presentation for the ‘The Green Bean 
Competition’. Ask them to read and become familiar with these documents before the 
next session. 
Group activity for rubric interaction (40 minutes)
Student Teachers should have read the ‘Example for Extended Assessment: The Green 
Bean Competition’, and the PowerPoint presentation in detail for homework.
Tell Student Teachers that in this activity , they will study an example of  an extended 
performance-based assessment called ‘the green bean competition’. This assessment 
task is called extended assessment because it takes three weeks to conduct when done 
in its entirety . Make sure that Student Teachers know that they will not be performing 
the green bean competition. Instead they will use the task to study the features and 
rubric set-up of  a performance-based assessment task.
Divide Student Teachers into groups of  two or three and ask them to take a few 
minutes to study the green bean competition and then note its features. Some of  the 
features are:
•	 Subject content and skills being covered by the task
•	 Learning objectives being assessed
•	 List of  assessment tasks used to assess the learning objectives
•	 The rubric
After the groups are done, take a few responses from the class and note them on the 
board. Ask Student Teachers to check their responses and correct them if  necessary .
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
70
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Now ask the Student Teachers to study the rubric for the green bean competition, the 
learning objectives for the task, and the list of  assessment tasks in detail and answer 
the following:
•	 Which row of  the rubric is used at which point during the assessment task and  
 what student skill is it assessing?
•	 Which parts (rows) of  the rubric would they use daily , only once, or more than  
 once during the assessment task?
After the groups are done, ask them to merge with another group and study each 
other’s answers. Pay special attention to answers that are different and discuss why the 
other group has chosen that specific answer.
Student Teachers may change their answer after the discussion if  they feel the other 
group’s answer makes more sense as compared to their own.
After the groups are done, go over the questions of  the activity with the whole class. 
Take a few responses for each question and make corrections if  necessary . 
Ask the groups to pay special attention during this part of  the activity , ask questions, 
and clarify any misunderstandings they might have.
Student Teachers should also make any corrections to their work if  needed. 
Closing (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to write about their understanding of  performance-based 
assessment tasks and how they could or could not be useful in assessing student learning. 
Collect Student Teachers’ responses at the end of  the class.
Homework
Ask the Student Teachers to read the ‘Example of  short assessment: Who has the best 
apples?’ from the ‘Performance-based Assessment’ handout for homework.
Session 2: Grading performance-based assessment tasks
In class today (5 minutes)
In this session Student Teachers will perform a short performance-based assessment 
task and then grade it using a rubric provided with the task. These two activities 
are designed to give Student Teachers a chance to get hands-on experience with a 
performance-based assessment task and practice grading it using a rubric.
Conducting a performance-based assessment task in class (30 minutes)
Tell Student Teachers that they will conduct the performance-based assessment task 
‘Who has the best apples?’ by following all the instructions listed under the task in the 
‘Performance-based Assessment’ handout. 
71
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Ask Student Teachers to form groups of  two to perform the task as listed in the 
‘Performance-based Assessment’ handout and follow all the instructions. At the end 
of  the task, each group draws two bar graphs and writes a letter to the farmer of  the 
winner apple. 
NOTE: Even though the task asks for only one person per group, groups of two would 
work best for providing Student T eachers a chance to conduct the task in a shorter amount 
of time. 
Activity for grading a performance-based assessment task using 
a rubric (15 minutes)
After completing the assessment tasks, groups swap their data charts, graphs, and 
letters with another group and use the rubric (included with the task) to grade each 
other’s assessment tasks. 
Closing (10 minutes)
After completing the grading tasks, bring the class together to discuss Student 
Teachers’ experience of  the performance-based assessment task and use of  a rubric for 
grading purposes. The following questions can be used to guide the discussion:
•	 What did you like about this task?
•	 What did you not like about this task?
•	 What would you add or take out to make this task more effective?
•	 Do you think there is a value to students in using performance-based   
 assessment tasks? Why or why not?
•	 What problems, if  any , do you envision in using performance-based assessment  
 tasks in your own classroom?
•	 What was your experience like using a rubric to grade the assessment task?
•	 What did you like about this rubric?
•	 What did you not like about this rubric?
•	 Do you think there is a value to students in using rubrics? Why or why not?
•	 What problems, if  any , do you envision in using rubrics to grade assessment   
 tasks in your own classroom?
After the discussion, collect groups’ graded tasks to provide feedback on their use of  
rubrics to grade the performance-based assessment task. 
NOTE: If Student T eachers are not done with their performance-based assessment task 
at the end of the allotted 25 minutes, let them continue with it and ask the groups to finish 
the second activity (where they grade the other group’s task using a rubric) for homework. 
In this case, allow each group enough time to swap their completed performance-based 
assessment tasks with the other group before they leave the class. 
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
72
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Session 3: Designing performance-based assessment tasks
In class today (5 minutes)
In this session, Student Teachers will work in groups to design a performance-based 
assessment task for a subject and topic of  their own choosing.
Ask Student Teachers to find a partner and give them some time to work together to 
pick a subject and topic for designing a performance-based assessment task.
Visit each group to find out which topics they are choosing and if  they need any help 
picking a topic. After they are done picking a topic and subject, ask them to write the 
subject and topic on a piece of  paper with their names and submit it you.
Activity for designing a performance-based assessment task (50 minutes)
Tell the groups (with two Student Teachers per group) that in this activity they will 
design a short performance-based assessment task. The duration of  the task should 
not be longer than one (45-minute) class period.
Tell the groups to closely follow the format of  the two performance-based assessment 
task examples from the ‘Performance-based Assessment’ handout. 
Following are some of  the important components Student Teachers should include in 
their tasks:
•	 Title and duration of  the task
•	 The subject content and skills assessed by the task
•	 Grade level and suggested grouping of  students to complete the task
•	 Description of  the task, including instructions for the students
•	 Learning objectives being assessed by the task
•	 Description and placement (where during the task each assessment activity will  
 occur) of  assessment activities included in the task (it should not have more   
 than two assessment activities)
•	 Rubric (addressing all assessment activities) for the task (the rubric should not  
 be longer than a page)
NOTE: This activity can be used as a graded assignment for this course.
Closing (5 minutes)
Let Student Teachers know that they should finish the task for homework and be 
ready to hand it in next week.
Give the groups time to decide on a time and place to meet after class to finish this 
task for homework.
73
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 10: Portfolios—A tool for assessment 
and instruction 
Three of  the books chosen as texts for this course have chapters on portfolios: 
McMillan (pages 256–283); Miller, Linn, and Gronlund (pages 282–307); and Stiggins, 
Arter, Chappius, and Chappius (pages 335–359). The portfolio chapters in all three 
books are written from the perspective of  a teacher using portfolios with students 
in grades 1 through 12. Portfolios created by students in primary and secondary 
schools typically have a subject matter focus. Of  the three textbooks with chapters 
on portfolios as an assessment tool, the chapter in the McMillan book is more 
comprehensive than Stiggins and easier to read than Miller. Near the end of  the last 
session of  Week 9, tell Student Teachers to read the chapter on portfolios in the 
McMillan book before coming to the first session of  Week 10.
Student Teachers created a portfolio in the Semester 3 Student Teaching Practicum 
and will create another portfolio in the Semester 4 Student Teaching Practicum. 
Student Teachers’ portfolios are more like portfolios created by artists, architects, 
journalists, photographers, and models than portfolios created by primary school 
students. Guidelines for creating a portfolio are similar whether the portfolio belongs 
to a student in grade 1 or a student studying architecture.   
This week’s course work will capitalize on Student Teachers’ experience preparing their 
portfolios for the Semester 3 Developmental Practicum and will serve as preparation for 
constructing the portfolio for the Semester 4 Teaching Practicum. The first session is a 
discussion between the Instructor and Student Teachers about guidelines for planning a 
portfolio. Material from the McMillan text is interwoven with the experience of  creating 
a portfolio in last semester’s Student Teaching Practicum. Sessions 2 and 3 are used 
for practice and feedback involving two particularly important actions required from 
students constructing a portfolio: selecting the documents to include and constructing 
an evaluation of  those documents.
Session 1: Guidelines for planning a portfolio
Individual work (10 minutes)
Allow approximately 10 minutes for Student Teachers, working individually , to write 
a description of  the Semester 3 Student Teaching Portfolio that can be used as a 
prompt, if  necessary , for today’s discussion.
Whole-class discussion (30 minutes)
Begin the discussion with this statement: ‘ A portfolio is a purposeful collection of  
a student’s work that tells a story of  effort, progress, or achievement’. Tell Student 
Teachers that a portfolio is classified as an assessment tool. Assessment specialists 
recommend that portfolios also be classified as teaching tools. These specialists want 
teachers to know that creating a portfolio is an excellent way for a student to learn 
how to evaluate their own work. This is the instructional outcome of  making a 
portfolio to which assessment specialists refer.
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
74
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Ask Student Teachers to name and describe the different types of  portfolios as 
indicated by McMillan (on page 259). (Answer: celebration, competence, growth, 
project, and evaluation.)
Ask for the name and purpose of  the Semester 3 portfolio. Indicate the obvious fact 
that it is easy to place that portfolio in the list because it is a growth portfolio.
Distribute the portfolio handout from the Student Teaching Handbook for Semester 4 
(‘The Professional Portfolio’). Give Student Teachers a few minutes to read the document.
Ask, ‘Where does this portfolio fit in the list of  portfolio types?’ (Answer: Though 
‘best practices’ are emphasized in the description of  the portfolio, the purpose of  the 
portfolio is to determine a prospective teacher’s competence relative to professional 
standards. Therefore a professional portfolio is more like a competence portfolio than 
a celebration portfolio.)
With the Student Teachers (using McMillan’s text as a guide; page 257), create a list of  
characteristics of  portfolios. (Answer: The purpose and audience for the portfolio are 
determined first; the type of  documents and artefacts that will be put in the portfolio 
is determined; a structure for the portfolio is established; the persons [student, 
teacher, both] who will select the entries to the portfolio are determined; evaluation 
criteria for individual entries and the completed portfolio are determined; student 
responsibility for reflection and evaluation of  individual entries and the completed 
portfolio is established; a schedule for student–teacher conferences is established, and 
students understand that they will make [and date] continuous entries to the portfolio 
until such time as the portfolio is complete.)
Distribute the professional standards handout, ‘Standard 1 Subject Matter Knowledge’ 
and ‘Standard 4 Instructional Planning and Strategies’ of  the National Professional 
Standards for Teachers in Pakistan (NPSTP).
Using the created list (written on board or posted on wall), ask Student Teachers to 
describe the Semester 3 Student Teaching Portfolio. 
Expected response: The Semester 3 Student Teaching Portfolio is a growth portfolio, and 
the primary audience is the Student Teacher’s college or university student teaching 
Supervisor; every artefact the Student Teacher produces during the practicum is an entry 
for the portfolio; the entries are organized in four sections (school-based assignments, 
planning, teaching, and feedback); evaluation criteria are all nine standards, including 
the sub-standards in NPSTP; Student Teachers received a form in the Student Teaching 
Handbook for Semester 3 that they used to make regular entries in the portfolio; they 
also received a final self-assessment form on which they were expected to record the 
portfolio documents for each of  the nine standards and rate their performance on the 
standard; subsequently , the college or university student teaching Supervisor rated the 
Student Teacher’s performance and converted the rating to a grade using a standardized 
procedure; a conference between the Student Teacher and College/University Supervisor 
was the culminating activity for this process.
75
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Guide Student Teachers to compare their experience with the Semester 3 Student 
Teaching Portfolio with the list of  characteristics of  portfolios that they created from 
the McMillan text.
Expected response: There are many similarities. The two major differences are that 
Student Teachers did not select entries for the Semester 3 Student Teaching Portfolio 
(they entered every artefact they created) and they produced reflections of  some of  
their work, but these reflections were not necessarily evaluations.
Homework (20 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to look again at the handout for the professional portfolio they 
will construct during the Semester 4 Teaching Practicum. Draw their attention to the 
fact that they are supposed to include some artefacts from the developmental portfolio 
in their professional portfolio.
Ask the Student Teachers what they think that means in terms of  the work they are 
expected to do with the portfolios from Semester 3. (Expected response: Student Teachers 
will have to select artefacts from the Semester 3 portfolio that represent growth [positive 
changes over time] and demonstrate skill at self-evaluation by explaining in writing the 
evidence they used to document change [growth] for each artefact.)
Tell the Student Teachers that the remaining class sessions for this week will be used 
for practice evaluating their own work. The practice will be selective. Rather than 
working with all nine standards from the NPSTP , they will work with two: Standards 
1 and 4. Direct their attention to the handout distributed earlier in this session that has 
levels for each sub-standard in Standards 1 and 4.
Give Student Teachers the following homework assignment: tell them to use their 
growth portfolio and select three lessons they taught over the semester. (These will be 
lesson fragments—the beginning, middle, or end of  a lesson—of  which two fragments 
were taught by the cooperating teacher. The three fragments they select should be 
either the beginning of  the lesson or the end of  the lesson.) For each lesson plan they 
select, they should also select the pre-observation note to the observing cooperating 
teacher, examples of  students’ work during the lesson with feedback from them, the 
teaching resources they used during the lesson, the observation tool they requested 
the cooperating teacher to use, the cooperating teacher’s feedback based on their 
observation, and their own reflection after the lesson.
Ask Student Teachers to bring these three lesson plans and all supporting documents 
to the next class session. Emphasize that these lessons are supposed to document 
growth in their knowledge and skill as teachers as indicated by the criteria in two of  
the National Professional Standards for Teachers in Pakistan. Tell Student Teachers 
that they should use those two standards and their earlier evaluation of  their 
performance on those standards to choose the lessons. They should also use their 
student teaching Supervisor’s evaluation of  their performance on the two standards. 
Ask them to bring the two standards to the next class and advise them to bring the 
two previous evaluations (theirs and the student teaching Supervisor’s) to class also.
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
76
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Session 2: Self-evaluation of entries in a portfolio
NOTE: For the oral presentation on Student T eachers’ evaluation of evidence of growth in 
their lessons, there is useful information in Miller (pages 297–303). 
Whole-class discussion about the difference between reflection 
and evaluation (10 minutes)
Ask for a definition of  reflection. (Answer: Reflection has more than one meaning. 
When it is used in reference to thinking, it means thinking deeply or seriously about 
an idea or experience. Reflection can be an evaluative or can lead to an evaluation, but 
the two concepts are not synonymous.)
Ask for a definition of  evaluation. (Answer: Judging an event, object, idea, or person 
carefully; determining the value of  an event, object, idea, or person. Evaluation 
always carries the idea of  judging and placing value on something.)
Acknowledge with the Student Teachers that many of  their courses emphasize 
reflection as an important mental process in learning to teach. In this course at this 
time, they are asked to evaluate their own work. That is a task that is normally the 
responsibility of  college or university faculty . The ability to evaluate one’s own work 
is an important cognitive/emotional process for teachers as well as for students. To 
repeat a message made earlier this week, making a portfolio can be an effective way to 
learn the process of  self-evaluation.
Presentation: Documenting evidence of growth through portfolio 
artefacts (10 minutes)
Explain to Student Teachers that their task is to prove they learned to teach more 
effective lessons over the course of  their first student teaching practice. The criteria 
for ‘more effective lessons’ are specified in the National Professional Standards for 
Teachers in Pakistan. (For example, one criterion for improved lessons is the use of  
sources in addition to textbooks for lesson content. Another criterion is lessons that 
include teaching resources clearly linked to individual learning outcomes rather than 
teaching resources that bear little relationship to individual learning outcomes.)
Tell Student Teachers that they are to write short commentaries on three documents in 
each lesson: the lesson plan, the examples of  student work with their feedback, and their 
reflections after teaching. In these commentaries they will cite the evidence that the 
second lesson is improved over the first and the third lesson is improved over the second. 
They can use all of  the documents they have for each lesson as sources of  evidence.
77
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
For the first lesson, which will be the weakest of  the three, the Student Teacher can use 
the commentaries on the lesson plan, student work, and Student Teacher reflection to 
respond to these points:
•	 I chose this entry for my portfolio because …
•	 These are the weaknesses in this entry (lesson plan, feedback, reflection).
•	 These are the strengths in this entry .
•	 This is what I need to learn to improve the lesson, etc.
For the second and third lessons, Student Teachers can use the commentaries to 
respond to these points:
•	 Remember that the major weaknesses in the first lesson entries were …
•	 Please notice these changes in this lesson plan, feedback to students, and   
 reflection about teaching.
•	 This is what I am particularly proud about with this lesson plan.
•	 This is what I would do differently if  I were to teach this lesson again.
Tell Student Teachers that it will be helpful if  they highlight the sentences in each of  
the documents they use that are evidence for change.
Independent work: Preparing commentaries for the first lesson entries 
(15 minutes)
Student Teachers work alone to search documents for the first lesson and write the 
commentaries for documents in that lesson.
Pair work: Student Teachers provide feedback to each other (10 minutes)
Student Teachers form pairs and provide feedback to each other.
Independent work: Preparing evaluation commentaries for the second 
and third lessons (15 minutes)
Student Teachers work alone to prepare commentaries that include evidence 
of  improvement in the second lesson over the first and the third lesson over the 
second lesson.
Tell Student Teachers that unfinished work at the end of  the session is homework to 
be completed by the next class session.
Session 3: Self-evaluation of entries in a portfolio (cont.)
At the beginning of  this session, ask four students, two whose work is above-average 
for the class and two whose work is average for the class, to be prepared to present their 
summary statements about growth in teaching based on evidence from their Semester 
3 Student Teaching Practicum Portfolio. Ask them in particular to talk about how they 
used the NPSTP to look for evidence of  growth in teaching skill in their lessons.
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
78
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Pair work: Feedback on the commentaries prepared for Lessons 2 
and 3 (15 minutes)
Student Teachers work in the pairs they formed in the last class session to provide 
feedback to each other on the evidence they are using to make the case for 
improvement in their lessons over the course of  the Student Teaching Practicum.
Independent work: Summary with supportive evidence from portfolio 
of growth in teaching over time (15 minutes)
Student Teachers work alone to summarize the evidence they used from entries to a 
portfolio to argue the case for improved teaching. They are expected to use Standards 
1 and 4 of  the National Professional Standards for Teachers in Pakistan as the criteria 
for growth. These criteria should be in the summaries.
Individual reports to the class on the use of entries in a growth portfolio 
(20 minutes)
Remind Student Teachers that the work they have been doing with their Semester 3 
portfolios can be used (probably with some revision) to fulfil part of  the requirement 
for the Semester 4 portfolio.
Encourage members of  the class to ask questions of  those who report to the class 
on their efforts to use entries from the Semester 3 portfolio to document growth in 
teaching skill.
Whole-class discussion: Advantages and disadvantages of portfolios 
for instruction and assessment (10 minutes)
Use the McMillan text (pages 259–261) as the basis for this discussion.
Explain that:
•	 Portfolios may be more useful for teaching and learning than they are for 
assessment. Making a portfolio requires students to use the higher-order 
cognitive skills in Bloom’s Taxonomy of  educational objectives (analysis, 
synthesis, and evaluation).
•	 Portfolios are particularly useful for teaching students how to evaluate their 
own work.
•	 Portfolios may work for formative assessment but are very difficult to use for 
summative assessment because scoring is unreliable.
•	 Standardizing a portfolio makes it easier to score with some confidence that the 
score is reliable. Standardizing a portfolio means that it is no longer only the 
individual story of  a student’s efforts, progress, and achievement.
•	 The individual nature of  a portfolio has always been considered one of  its virtues.
 
 UNIT     4 TEACHER-MADE TESTS—
 HOW DO TEACHERS DO IT?
UNIT 4: TEACHER-MADE TESTS—HOW 
DO TEACHERS DO IT?
(4 weeks/12 hours)
T eaching and learning resources for Unit 4
Handouts for Student T eachers
Week 11
‘Unit 4, Week 11, Session 3: Sun, Earth, and the Moon Unit Test’
‘Unit 4, Week 11, Session 3: ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon Unit Test Key’
Week 12
‘Unit 4, Week 12, Session 1: Template for Table of  Specifications for the Sun, Earth,      
 and Moon Unit Test’ 
Unit 4, week 12, session 1: Subject matter topics for the Sun, Earth, and the Moon unit 
grouped by learning objective
‘Unit 4, Week 12, Session 2: Learning Objectives from Lessons in the Sun, Earth, and  
 the Moon Unit Grouped by Subject Matter Topics’
‘Unit 4, Week 12, Session 1: Table of  Specification for the Sun, Earth, and Moon Unit Test’ 
‘Unit 4, Week 12, Session 2: Use of  Bloom’s Taxonomy of  Educational Objectives to  
 Create Test Questions’
‘Unit 4, Week 12, Session 2: Use of  Bloom’s Taxonomy of  Educational Objectives to  
 Create Test Questions (Answer Key)’
‘Unit 4, Week 12, Session 3: Guidelines for Writing Test Questions’
‘Unit 4, Week 12, Session 3: Sample Questions: Student Teacher Copy’
‘Unit 4, Week 12, Session 3: Question-writing Exercise’
Week 13
‘Unit 4, Week 12, Session 3: Guidelines for Writing Test Questions’
‘Unit 4, Week 12, Session 3: Question-writing Exercise’
‘Unit 4, Week 12, Session 3: Sample Questions: Student Teacher Copy’
NOTE: The week 13 handouts were distributed during Week 12.
Week 14
‘Unit 4, Week 14, Session 1: Assessment Tracker’
‘Unit 4, Week 14, Session 2: Sun, Earth, and the Moon Unit Test’ (This was used in 
Unit 4, Week 11, Session 3)
81
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Resources for faculty
Week 12
‘Unit 4, Week 12, Session 3: Sample Questions: Instructor Key’
‘Unit 4, Week 14, Session 3: Sun, Earth, and the Moon Unit: Instructor’s Copy’ (From  
 Unit 2, Week 4, Session 1)
Readings
Weeks 11–14
•	 McMillan, pp. 156–196
•	 Miller, Linn, and Gronlund, pp. 78–79, 142–149, 159–160 and 512–551
Week 11: T ests as assessment tools
Session 1: Personal experience with tests
In class today (2 minutes)
Tell Student Teachers that tests are one of  the most commonly used assessment tools. 
Student Teachers will learn about the process of  test construction in this unit, but 
before getting started with that, they will explore their personal experiences and 
previous knowledge about tests.
Group discussion on personal experiences with tests (25 minutes)
This exercise will help Student Teachers see how going through this course might 
have affected their experiences and preconceived notions about tests.
Tell the class that all of  them have had extensive experience with tests as students. In 
this activity , they will think back on their experiences with tests and discuss them in 
small groups. 
Divide Student Teachers into groups of  two or three and ask them to reflect on their 
experiences with tests during their student life and their feelings about tests. They 
should also discuss their opinions about using tests after becoming teachers.
After discussing each group member’s feelings, the groups should explore any 
differences of  opinion they might have and if  possible ways to resolve these differences. 
Give the groups 10 minutes to reflect and write their thoughts in their notebooks.
Ask each group to share their group’s feelings, experiences, opinions, and differences 
of  opinions with the rest of  the class. 
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
82
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Write any common themes emerging from the discussion on the board and ask 
Student Teachers to write them down in order to refer to them at the end of  this unit 
and course. 
Group discussion on strengths and limitations of tests (25 minutes)
In this discussion, Student Teachers will explore strengths and limitations of  tests as 
assessment tools by connecting what they learned about tests in this class and their 
previous knowledge, feelings, and opinions about tests. 
The main purpose of  this discussion is to understand that just like other assessment 
tools, tests have strengths and limitations that are important for teachers to know in 
order to make good tests and use them appropriately . 
Ask Student Teachers to go back to their original groups and connect their previous 
discussion on their personal feelings, experiences, and opinions about tests as assessment 
methods to what they have learned about the tests in previous sessions of  this course.
Ask Student Teachers to focus on strengths and limitations of  tests as assessment tools 
in light of  their personal experiences and the knowledge acquired about tests and 
other assessment methods in this class.
Each group should come up with at least two strengths and two limitations of  tests, 
and based on these, the groups should come up with two classroom situations:
•	 One situation in which a test would be the best assessment choice 
•	 One situation in which a test would not work very well
Student Teachers should explain their choices.
Pick a volunteer from each group to share the responses to the discussion points.
Write the groups’ discussion points on strengths and limitations of  tests on a board 
and underline the ones repeated by more than one group.
Bring the class’s attention to strengths and limitations that are common among the 
groups and solicit ideas to minimize these limitations. 
Brainstorm with the class about more learning assessment situations where tests are 
the best fit and others where they are not. Also discuss the reasons behind Student 
Teachers’ choices.
Encourage different opinions from the class on this issue and highlight the reasons 
behind these different opinions.
83
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Closing (5 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to take this time to reflect on today’s class discussions and 
write one short paragraph on how the class discussion affected or did not affect their 
feelings or opinions about tests as assessment tools and to note at least one new thing 
they learned about tests. 
Session 2: Achievement tests
In class today (10 minutes)
Tell the Student Teachers that after exploring their personal experience with tests and 
the strengths and limitations of  tests as assessment tools, in this session they will focus 
on achievement tests. Student Teachers will comprehend the purpose of  achievement 
tests and learn the characteristics of  standardized tests. 
Start a class discussion to find out what Student Teachers already know about 
achievement tests. Ask Student Teachers the following questions to start the discussion 
but do not limit the class to these questions. Let the discussion flow naturally . Be sure to 
keep this and all discussions Student Teacher–led discussions.
•	 You must have come across the phrase ‘achievement tests’. What does it mean?
•	 In what context have you heard this phrase?
•	 In your opinion, what is the purpose of  achievement tests?
•	 What role do achievement tests play in educational settings in Pakistan?
Take a few responses on each question from the class. If  a Student Teacher raises a question 
or makes an interesting observation, be sure to include that in the class discussion.
Lecture on achievement tests (10 minutes)
Cover the following topics in this lecture:
•	 The definition of  achievement tests. Try to tie in the Student Teachers’   
 definitions from the introduction discussion as much as possible.
¡¡ Achievement tests measure acquired knowledge or skill level in a specific area. 
In other words, it assesses the amount of  knowledge students have retained 
after classroom instruction. Achievement tests are most often standardized.
•	 The purpose and significance of  achievement tests in educational settings.
Introduction to standardized tests (15 minutes)
Tell Student Teachers to envision their educational experiences from primary level up 
until this point and think about the type of  achievement tests they have come across. 
Give them a minute or two to think and take a few responses from the class.
Even if  Student Teachers do not know the name, ask them to describe the tests (for 
example, if  the directions given on the test were predetermined and the same for 
everyone taking the test, if  the scoring procedures and test-taking conditions were 
consistent for all the test takers).
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
84
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
NOTE: Most will describe some aspects or characteristics of standardized tests as most 
achievement tests administered in educational settings are standardized tests.
Incorporating Student Teachers’ descriptions of  standardized tests as much as 
possible, provide them with a definition of  standardized tests and ask them to note it 
down in their notebooks.
Standardized tests are administered under standard conditions that are the same for all test 
takers. Characteristics of  standardized tests include predetermined test directions, scoring 
standards, scoring interpretations, and test-taking conditions. These characteristics are 
standard and the same for all test takers.
Tell Student Teachers that standardized achievement tests will be the focus of  this and 
the next session.
Group activity on examples of standardized tests (15 minutes)
Now that Student Teachers know what standardized tests are, ask them to work in 
groups of  two to three to think of  at least three examples of  standardized tests they 
have taken and the characteristics of  those tests that make them standardized.
Give the groups five to seven minutes to discuss and complete the task.
Ask a volunteer from each group to share their examples and characteristics and note 
them on the board.
After all the groups have shared their examples, ask the class if  in their opinion, any 
one of  those examples is not a standardized test. Student Teachers should also provide 
reasons for their opinions. 
Closing (5 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to take a few minutes to reflect on the session’s discussions and 
write a short paragraph on their understanding of  achievement tests and standardized 
tests. They should also include at least one new thing they learned about achievement 
tests and standardized tests. 
Collect Student Teachers’ reflections at the end of  the class and read them carefully to 
get an idea of  their understanding of  achievement and standardized tests.
85
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Session 3: Standardized tests
In class today (5 minutes)
Now that Student Teachers understand the characteristics of  a standardized test, tell 
them that in this session they will work with a standardized test to highlight those 
characteristics. They will also study two types of  score interpretations used with 
standardized tests: norm-referenced and criterion-referenced tests.
Have a short class discussion to review the definition, characteristics, and examples of  
standardized tests. 
Group activity on standardized tests (25 minutes)
In this activity , Student Teachers study a standardized test (the ‘Sun, Earth, and the 
Moon Unit Test’) and look for the characteristics that make it a standardized test.
Divide Student Teachers into groups of  two or three and provide each group with the 
‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon Unit Test’ and the ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon Unit Test 
Key’ handouts. Each group should take 10 minutes to study the test and come up with 
three characteristics that make it a standardized test.
NOTE: The answer key is also one of the characteristics of a standardized test, as it allows 
teachers to grade test takers’ responses in a standard manner. Let the Student T eachers 
know about this characteristic if they do not come up with it on their own. 
After 10 minutes of  group work, have one Student Teacher from each group share 
their characteristics of  the test with the rest of  the class. Write these characteristics on 
the board and ask Student Teachers to make a note of  them.
Lecture on two types of score interpretations for standardized tests (10 minutes)
Now that Student Teachers have an understanding of  characteristics of  a standardized 
test, introduce them to two ways to interpret scores (norm referenced versus 
criterion-referenced) from standardized tests.
Ask Student Teachers if  they have heard about norm-referenced versus criterion-
referenced scores and ask them for definitions first. 
Write definitions of  both types of  scores and try to incorporate Student Teachers’ 
explanations of  the two concepts as much as possible. Ask Student Teachers to make a 
note of  these definitions.
•	 Norm-referenced test: Compares each test taker’s score against others taking 
the same test and identifies if  the individual test taker did better or worse than 
others taking the same test. 
•	 Criterion-referenced test: Compares the test taker against set standards on 
a test score scale and is used to determine the candidates’ mastery of  content 
material or skill level.
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
86
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Group discussion on norm-referenced vs. criterion-referenced scores (15 minutes)
Ask the Student Teachers to work in groups of  two or three to name two examples 
each of  norm-referenced and criterion-referenced tests and explain their reasoning for 
choosing those examples. 
After the groups are done, ask one person from each group to share their examples 
and reasons for choosing those examples with the rest of  the class.
Student Teachers should come to the conclusion that most tests given in school 
settings (such as unit tests, exams, etc.) are criterion referenced whereas most compet-
itive exams are norm referenced. 
Closing (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to brainstorm and write a short paragraph on reasons for 
the use of  criterion-referenced exams in school settings and norm-referenced in 
competitive settings (such as university admissions exams).
Ask a few Student Teachers to share their responses with the rest of  the class and 
make corrections if  needed. 
Homework 
Ask Student Teachers to read pages 78–79, 142–149, 159–160 and 512–513 from the 
textbook Measurement and Assessment in Teaching. 
This text explains the process of  creating a of  Table of  Specifications (blueprint for 
a test) very well and will provide Student Teachers with a good background for next 
week’s sessions.
87
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 12: The test construction process
Session 1: Begin with a blueprint (T able of Specifications) 
for the test
In class today (5 minutes)
Tell the Student Teachers that this week they will learn how to create an achievement 
test. To begin, three terms need to be clarified: objective; topic, and category. When 
Benjamin Bloom created his taxonomy , he referred to the cognitive processes he 
thought teachers should help students develop as learning objectives. That terminology 
is a variation on the way the term learning objective is used in this course. 
In the course, learning objective refers to a knowledge and/or skill that a student 
should acquire from a specific lesson and is tied to a particular subject matter topic. 
In each case (Bloom’s use of  the term objective and the use of  the term objective in the 
lesson plan template taught in this course), the focus is learning. Bloom was thinking 
about learning and mental processes. The lesson plans in the course are focused on 
learning and subject matter topics. The two perspectives are not identical, but they are 
complementary . The terms category and topic are used in reference to subject matter. 
Category refers to clusters of  related subject matter topics (for example, celestial 
motion). Topic refers to more specific subject matter knowledge or skill (for example, 
the Earth’s axis and related motion).
Introduce a template for a Table of Specifications (5 minutes)
Distribute the handout ‘Template for Table of  Specifications for Sun, Earth, and 
Moon Unit Test’. Tell Student Teachers that a fair test assesses all the topics taught 
during an instructional unit (that the test is assessing) and stays away from topics not 
covered by the teacher. How do teachers make sure that they fairly cover the content 
taught during an instructional unit?
One of  the tools used by teachers is a blueprint for the test called a Table of  
Specifications. In other words, the Table of  Specifications is a technical name for the 
blueprint of  a test. Constructing a blueprint for a test assures that the teacher has 
adequately covered the subject matter for the test and matched the test items with the 
appropriate learning objectives.
Direct Student Teachers’ attention to the template. A Table of  Specifications is a two-way 
grid on which the teacher lists the subject matter topics (typically called content) to be 
included in the test. (The subject matter topics [content] are listed in the far left column 
of  the grid.) The learning objectives to be included in the test are typically drawn from 
Bloom’s Taxonomy of  educational objectives and written into the lessons to be covered in 
the test. The learning objectives are written across the top row of  the grid.
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
88
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Bloom’s original taxonomy includes six cognitive processes arranged in a sequence of  
increasing complexity (knowledge, comprehension, application, analysis, synthesis, 
and evaluation). Assessment specialists suggest that teachers creating a Table of  
Specifications for the first time start with a simple cognitive framework that includes 
the first three cognitive processes (knowledge, comprehension, and application). 
Introduce the process of constructing a Table of Specifications (15 minutes)
In this activity Student Teachers will study the template for a Table of  Specifications 
for the ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’ unit test to learn about different features of  a 
Table of  Specifications. Keep Student Teachers’ attention focused on the template and 
discuss the process for constructing a Table of  Specifications with them.
When constructing a Table of  Specifications for a test, teachers:
•	 identify the learning objectives in the lessons on which the test is based and 
place them in the top row of  the table.  
•	 group the subject matter topics in the lessons to be covered by the test under 
the appropriate learning objective. (This has been done for the Student 
Teachers. See ‘Learning objectives from lessons in the Sun, Earth, and the 
Moon unit grouped by subject matter topics ’.)
•	 group the subject matter topics into four or five content categories and label 
each category (for example, ‘objects in the solar system’).
•	 decide on the total number of  questions on the test based on the number and 
complexity of  the subject matter topics to be covered by the test and the time 
that can be allocated for taking the test.
•	 record this total number of  test questions in the appropriate place on the table.
•	 decide on the number of  test questions to be assigned to each subject matter 
topic and learning objective based on professional judgement about the 
importance of  the subject matter topic and the learning objective to the goal 
of  the unit and the amount of  instructional time devoted to the subject matter 
topic and the learning objective in the unit’s lessons.
•	 record the number of  proposed questions in each of  the boxes in the table.
•	 total the number of  test questions proposed for each subject matter topic (rows).
•	 record numbers in the appropriate boxes on the table.
•	 total the number of  questions proposed for each learning objective (columns).
•	 record numbers in the appropriate boxes on the table.
•	 determine the percentage of  questions assigned to each subject matter topic 
and each learning objective and record in the appropriate boxes on the table.
•	 study the distribution of  questions by subject matter and learning objective 
and determine if  the distribution reflects adequate coverage of  the content and 
learning objectives in the lessons on which the test will be based. If  not, they 
revise the distribution of  questions.
•	 write test questions for the test using the distribution by topics and objectives in 
the table.
89
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
NOTE: In the template for the table distributed to Student T eachers, Bloom’s knowledge 
category is subdivided into definition and recognition and identification. 
Small group activity: Creating subject matter (content) categories (10 minutes)
After discussing the process of  creating a Table of  Specifications, divide Student 
Teachers into groups of  three. Ask each group to choose a reporter. Make sure they 
have two handouts (the template and the subject matter topics for the Sun, Earth, and 
Moon unit grouped by learning objective). Tell the Student Teachers to group the 
subject matter topics into four or five content categories (for example, relationships 
between the Sun, Earth, and Moon). Tell them to enter their content categories on 
the Table of  Specifications template in the column labelled ‘content’.
Small group activity: Creating a Table of Specifications (25 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to remain in their groups but direct their attention to the front 
of  the classroom. Choose four groups to send their reporters (one at a time) to the 
front of  the room to report on their content categories. The purpose of  this exercise, 
hopefully , is to show that, though they are working with the same list of  subject 
matter topics, groups will not necessarily create the same content categories. Then 
tell them to return to work with their groups and turn the template into a completed 
Table of  Specifications. Because they are familiar with the lessons in the solar system 
unit, they can use that knowledge to decide how many questions to include in the 
test and how to distribute those questions across the subject matter categories and 
learning objectives. After deciding on the total number of  questions for the test 
and assigning numbers of  questions to each subject matter category and learning 
objective, it is easy to calculate totals and figure percentages. Then each group must 
decide if  their Table of  Specifications gives adequate coverage to the solar system 
content and the learning objectives in the unit (knowledge, comprehension, and 
application). If  not, they have to revise the numbers in the table.  
The goal for this activity is to finish it in the time allotted so each group’s table can 
be given to you, the Instructor, when the class ends. You can then provide written 
feedback and return the tables at the beginning of  the next class.  
Homework (10 minutes)
If  most groups are not finished completing the Table of  Specifications and you choose to 
give them additional time as homework, assign a one-page paper in which Student Teachers:
•	 explain the purpose of  a Table of  Specifications for a test
•	 describe any challenges they foresee in constructing blueprints for tests when   
 they have their own classrooms
•	 give an opinion as to whether the value of  a blueprint makes facing the   
 challenges worthwhile.
If  Student Teachers have given you their test blueprints, distribute the completed 
‘Table of  Specifications for the Sun, Earth, and the Moon Unit Test’. Tell Student 
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
90
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Teachers to study it in preparation for comparing it with the Table of  Specifications 
they created for the same science content and learning objectives. It is important 
for them to think for themselves in this exercise rather than be influenced by the 
blueprint on which the unit test was based. Ask them to think about the claim 
assessment specialists make when they write ‘professional judgement is the essence 
of  classroom assessment’. Ask the Student Teachers to consider if  creating a Table 
of  Specifications for a test is a good example of  that claim. If  so, why? Tell Student 
Teachers that the role of  professional judgement in creating a Table of  Specifications 
will be a discussion topic for the next class.
Session 2: From learning to create a T able of 
Specifications to learning to write test questions 
If  Student Teachers have not been given the ‘Table of  Specification for the Sun, Earth, 
and the Moon Unit Test’ handout and ‘Learning Objectives from Lessons in the Sun, 
Earth, and the Moon Unit Grouped by Subject Matter Topics’, do so now . 
In class today (5 minutes)
Announce the plan for today’s class:
•	 Study the subject matter categories in Student Teachers’ tables in comparison 
with the table created for the solar system unit test.
•	 Study the distribution of  test questions across learning objectives in Student 
Teachers’ tables in comparison with the distribution in the table created for the 
solar system unit test.
•	 Consider the role of  professional judgement in creating a Table of  
Specifications for a test: what do educators mean when they use the term 
‘professional judgement’?
•	 Discussion of  the role of  professional judgement in creating a Table of  
Specifications for a test.
Class activity: Comparisons between Student Teachers’ tables and the 
table 
created for the solar system unit test (20 minutes) 
Write the subject matter categories from the table on the board or chart paper. (These 
were the subject matter categories used to create the test for the unit on the solar system.)
Ask the reporter for each group to report on the group’s subject matter categories.
For each category that is the same as a category in the example, put a check beside it 
in the list of  categories in the example. 
For categories that are not in the example, write each category name on the board or 
chart paper.  
Follow the same procedure with the distribution of  questions across learning objectives.
91
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
For each total distribution that is the same (knowledge 16 [combine the two 
knowledge objectives], comprehension 10, and application 9), put a check in the box 
with the total number of  application questions.  
Write each different distribution on the board or chart paper.  
Discuss each subject matter category that is different from the example.  
Decide if  the category is really not in the example or if  it is actually similar in content 
to a category in the example. If  the majority of  Student Teachers in the class believe 
that it is similar, erase or mark through that category . If  there are categories that 
remain, ask the members of  the group that included that subject matter category 
to explain the reason. Tell Student Teachers to use their memory of  the lessons in 
the solar system unit and the list of  subject matter topics in the handout that groups 
subject matter topics by learning objectives to help with this task.  
Follow the same procedure with the distribution of  questions across learning 
objectives. If  the numbers really aren’t very different, erase or mark them out. If  
distributions are different (for example, 9 knowledge questions and 17 comprehension 
questions), ask for an explanation. Ask Student Teachers if, based on this comparison 
between the table for the solar system unit test and the Student Teachers’ tables, they 
have recommendations for changing the Table of  Specifications for the unit test. (In 
actual practice, this would also mean changing the test.)
A definition of professional judgement (10 minutes)
Explain that judgement refers both to an outcome (a decision, an opinion, or a 
conclusion) and to the mental process of  reaching that outcome (for example, Ms Khan 
uses good judgement when she makes decisions about thought-provoking questions 
for a classroom discussion). Professional judgement is judgement used in the context 
of  work. Professional judgement is formed, in part, by knowledge and skill and also by 
experience and personal values. Professional judgement is necessary when a teacher 
has to make decisions for which there are no rules and when he or she does not have a 
prescription or script to follow while teaching.
Ask Student Teachers if  and when a teacher uses professional judgement in the 
creation of  a Table of  Specifications.
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
92
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Group activity on classifying test questions (25 minutes)
The purpose of  this exercise is to familiarize Student Teachers with the format of  
questions associated with the first three categories of  Bloom’s Taxonomy . Tell Student 
Teachers that dividing test questions according to Bloom’s objectives is important for 
testing basic as well as higher-order thinking skills. 
Remind Student Teachers that assessment specialists recommend using Bloom’s first 
three objectives when Student Teachers and teachers are learning to construct tests. 
Divide Student Teachers into groups of  two or three and give them the ‘Use of  
Bloom’s Taxonomy of  Educational Objectives to Create Test Questions’ handout. 
The handout provides the description of  the first three of  Bloom’s objectives. Ask the 
Student Teachers to take a few minutes to read them to refresh their memories. 
The handout explains the task. Each group should carefully read the questions and 
identify one of  Bloom’s objectives for each of  the 10 questions. Give Student Teachers 
10 minutes to complete the task.
After the groups are done, one Student Teacher from each group should share their 
answers with the rest of  the class. Take note of  the questions that were assigned 
different objectives by different groups. Ask one Student Teacher from each group  
to go over each of  the questions and discuss their reasons for assigning them to a 
specific objective. 
After the discussion, provide groups with the handout ‘Use of  Bloom’s Taxonomy of  
Educational Objectives to Create Test Questions (Answer Key)’. Each group should 
check their answers using the key and make corrections, if  needed.
Ask the class if  anyone disagrees with the answers from the answer key . If  yes, they 
should explain their reasons. Make sure the Student Teachers understand that some 
questions are difficult to fit into any one of  Bloom’s objectives and can belong to more 
than one.
Homework 
Give Student Teachers the ‘Guidelines for Writing Test Questions’ handout and ask 
them to read it before coming to the next session.
Session 3: Writing test questions
In class today (5 minutes)
Conduct a short class discussion to review Student Teachers’ understanding of  
Bloom’s first three objectives (knowledge, understanding, and application). 
Tell Student Teachers that because they are now familiar with the question format 
and style associated with Bloom’s first three objectives, in this session they will 
practice writing the sentence-completion (fill in the blank) and short-answer questions 
in each category .
93
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Group activity on strong and weak test questions (25 minutes)
The purpose of  this activity is to help Student Teachers internalize the guidelines for 
writing good test questions.
Divide Student Teachers into groups of  two or three and tell them that they will 
use two handouts, ‘Guidelines for Writing Test Questions’ and ‘Sample Questions: 
Student Teacher Copy’ for this activity .
Ask the groups to use ‘Guidelines for Writing Test Questions’ to explore differences 
between weak and strong test question examples in ‘Sample Questions: Student 
Teacher Copy’. 
After taking some time to study the strong and weak question illustrations, ask the 
groups to write about the differences between the two and describe what makes a 
strong and a weak illustration for different question types.
Go through the exercise and ask Student Teachers to share their opinions about 
differences between strong and weak questions for each question type.
During this class discussion, encourage Student Teachers to give different opinions. 
For example, after eliciting opinions from one Student Teacher, ask the class if  anyone 
has a different opinion and give that Student Teacher a chance to share their opinions, 
as well.
After the discussion, provide the groups with ‘Sample Questions: Instructor Key’ 
handout and give them some time to go through the explanation of  differences 
between a strong and a weak question for each question type.
Question-writing activity (25 minutes)
In this activity , Student Teachers will practice writing sentence-completion (fill in the 
blank) and short-answer questions.
Tell the Student Teachers that now that they have learned about characteristics of  
good test questions, they will get a chance to write test questions.
Make sure that each Student Teacher has the ‘Guidelines for Writing Test Questions’ 
handout to consult when writing questions.
Provide each Student Teacher with the ‘Question-Writing Exercise’ handout. This 
handout explains the task in detail. The handout also contains two articles that 
Student Teachers will use for their test questions. One of  the texts describes the 
monsoon season and the other is about the weather in Pakistan. The text on weather 
in Pakistan is available in the handout itself, but the monsoon article will need to be 
printed by the Instructor (the website is provided in the handout).
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
94
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Ask Student Teachers to read the instructions in the handout carefully and go through 
both articles. After reading the articles, each Student Teacher should write one test 
question for each question type (a sentence completion [fill in the blank] question and 
a short-answer question) in each of  the first three of  Bloom’s objectives (knowledge, 
understanding, and application). This means that each Student Teacher will write two 
questions in each category , thus six questions in total. They will write the other two 
question types (multiple-choice and true-false questions) described in the handout in 
the next class session. 
Closing (5 minutes)
Let the Student Teachers use this time to work on writing their questions. Circulate in 
the class to provide them with assistance and answer any questions they might have.
Homework
Student Teachers should finish writing the six questions (sentence-completion [fill in 
the blank] and short-answer) from the activity for homework.
Week 13: Writing test questions
Session 1: Writing test questions, continued 
In class today (5 minutes)
Tell the Student Teachers that in this session, they will practice writing multiple-
choice and true-false test questions and will compile a short 12-item test together.
Conduct a short class discussion to review the guidelines for writing good multiple-
choice and true-false questions. Use the ‘Guidelines for Writing Test Questions’ 
handout to carry on this discussion.
Question-writing activity (35 minutes) 
In this activity , Student Teachers will practice writing multiple-choice and true-false questions.
Tell the Student Teachers that now that they have learned about characteristics of  good 
multiple-choice and true-false questions, they will get a chance to write test questions.
Make sure that each Student Teacher has the ‘Guidelines for Writing Test Questions’ 
handout to consult when writing questions.
Student Teachers will be working with the handout ‘Question-Writing Exercise’ from 
the previous session and finish writing the other two questions types (multiple-choice 
and true-false).
Ask Student Teachers to read the instruction in the handout carefully and then go 
through both articles. After reading the articles, each Student Teacher will write one 
test question for each question type (multiple-choice and true-false) in each of  the 
first three of  Bloom’s categories (knowledge, understanding, and application). This 
means that each Student Teacher will write two questions in each category , thus, six 
questions in total. 
95
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
After writing the questions, Student Teachers should compile the six questions 
(sentence completion and short answer) from the previous session and six questions 
from this session (multiple-choice and true-false) on one piece of  paper to create a 
12-question mini-test.
Test feedback activity (15 minutes)
Tell the Student Teachers that in this activity , they will swap their tests with another 
Student Teacher and provide each other feedback on the quality of  their test questions.
Divide the Student Teachers into groups of  two and ask them to exchange their test 
with their partner.
Each Student Teacher should consult the ‘Guidelines for Writing Test Questions’ 
handout to review their partner’s test questions. 
They should write suggestions and feedback for their partners on the questions that 
(in their opinion) need improvement.
Closing (5 minutes)
Tell the Student Teachers that they will continue to work on the feedback exercise in 
the next session.
Tell the Student Teachers that now that they have understood the process of  writing 
good test questions, they should take a few moments to think about how the questions 
they have written are different from questions they have encountered as students.
Ask Student Teachers to write their opinions about the above-mentioned question in a 
short paragraph.
Homework
Student Teachers should finish the closing activity exercise as homework.
Session 2: Putting the test together
In class today (10 minutes)
The purpose of  this discussion is to learn about Student Teachers’ understanding of  
the question-writing process.
Conduct a small discussion on the prompt from the previous session’s closing writing 
exercise: ‘How are the questions you have written different from the questions you 
have encountered as students?’
Take a few responses from the class and follow the Student Teachers’ lead to carry the 
discussion. Encourage those with different answers and opinions to share their views 
and raise further questions. 
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
96
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Test feedback activity continued (25 minutes)
After learning about Student Teachers’ understanding of  the test-writing process, 
direct their attention to the test feedback. 
Tell the Student Teachers to return to their partners from the previous session and continue 
to provide feedback on each other’s tests. Give groups 15 minutes to finish the task.
After they are done providing each other written feedback, ask them to return their 
partners’ tests.
Each Student Teacher should carefully study the feedback provided by their partner 
and discuss any conflicts they might have about the feedback.
After resolving the issues, Student Teachers should incorporate their partners’ 
feedback to improve their test questions. 
Group discussion on clear test directions (20 minutes)
The purpose of  this discussion is to familiarize Student Teachers with the process of  
writing clear and concise test directions. 
Tell the Student Teachers that now that they have learned about writing effective 
test questions, during the rest of  this session they will study writing clear and 
concise test directions.
Divide the Student Teachers into groups of  three or four and ask them to consult the 
‘Sample Questions: Student Teacher Copy’ handout. The groups should take five minutes 
to study the directions for answering different types of  questions presented in this handout.
After studying the handout, ask the groups to discuss the following:
•	 What are the characteristics of  good test directions? Explain reasons for your choices.
•	 Why is being able to write good test directions important for a teacher?
Give the groups time to discuss the questions and write responses in their notebooks.
Ask a Student Teacher from each group to present their responses to the rest of  the class.
Note the characteristics of  good test question directions on the board. Make additions 
to the list if  Student Teachers have left out any important characteristics.
Closing (5 minutes)
Ask: ‘Why are good test directions important for creating a fair test for students?’
Take a few responses from the class.
Homework
Ask Student Teachers to brainstorm about the question from the closing activity and 
answer it in a short paragraph. Collect responses in the next session and read them to 
get an idea of  Student Teachers’ understanding of  the test direction writing process.
97
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Session 3: Writing directions for tests
In class today (5 minutes)
Take this time to review the characteristics of  good test directions with the Student Teachers.
Tell them that in this session they will write test directions for their mini-test.
Test directions writing activity (25 minutes)
Tell the Student Teachers that in this activity , they will write test directions for the 
test they created in the previous session. Student Teachers will consult the ‘Sample 
Questions: Student Teacher Copy’ handout for help.
Student Teachers should write the directions for the test as a whole (directions that 
apply to all the questions in the test, such as using a certain kind or colour of  pencil or 
pen) as well as separate directions for each question type. 
Activity for feedback on test directions (25 minutes)
In this activity , Student Teachers partner with each other to provide detailed feedback 
on their test directions.
Ask Student Teachers to find a partner and exchange their tests with each other.
Student Teachers should study their partner’s test directions and provide detailed 
written feedback. If  the partner feels that certain directions are unclear, they should 
not only point out those directions but provide suggestions for improvement.
After getting back the test, Student Teachers should study the detailed feedback 
provided by their partners.
If  they do not agree with any suggestions or feedback, they should discuss those with 
their partners. 
After the discussion, Student Teachers should incorporate their partner’s feedback to 
improve their test directions. 
NOTE: This test and the test key may count toward Student T eachers’ grades.
Closing (5 minutes) 
Student Teachers should continue working on improving the directions for their 
12-question mini-test and use this time to ask any questions they might have.
Homework
Ask Student Teachers to write a complete answer key for their 12-question mini-test 
for homework.
Student Teachers are required to hand in their test as well as the test key at the 
beginning of  the next class session to the Instructor.
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
98
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Tell the Student Teachers that their test and the test key may count toward their grade.
NOTE: T o prepare for next week, suggest that Student T eachers re-read their class notes 
for Weeks 2 and 6. The topic for Week 2, feedback, moves learning forward. That topic 
returns as a practice exercise in Session 2 of Week 14. The topic for Week 6 is ‘Interpreting 
assessment data’. That topic returns in Sessions 1 and 2 of Week 14 as a practice exer-
cise for interpreting test scores.
Week 14: Practice interpreting test scores
Session 1: One procedure for interpreting test scores
In class today (5 minutes)
Topics include:
•	 Raw scores (numbers) obtained from an assessment have to be interpreted to be 
useful in making decisions about teaching and learning.
•	 Sources that can be used to interpret scores: the assessment tool, especially 
tests; the learning environment in the classroom; the student’s prior knowledge; 
and the instruction the teacher has provided.
•	 Assessment trackers as a framework for interpreting test scores.
NOTE: Remember to collect the Student T eachers’ 12-question mini-tests and test answer 
keys from the previous class session. Remind Student T eachers again that these two items 
may count toward their course grade.
Class discussion: Interpreting test scores (15 minutes)
Ask Students Teachers if  they had the opportunity to study their notes from Unit 
2, Week 6 about interpreting numbers that some assessment tools, especially tests, 
produce. If  half  or more of  class members indicate that they did study their notes, 
treat this as a question-and-answer session. If  most Student Teachers did not re-read 
their notes, treat this as an oral presentation from the Instructor. 
99
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
What did you learn previously in this course about the use of  test scores?
Answer: The score that a test produces (the number of  answers correct or incorrect) 
gives the teacher guidance about how much a student learned from the instruction 
on which the test was based, but it doesn’t give guidance to the teacher about how to 
change instruction or to the student about changing learning strategies.
What does an assessment specialist mean when they say that a test score has to be 
interpreted?
Answer: They mean that the teacher has to look for explanations for a student’s score.
Can you identify where a teacher might look for explanations?
Answer: The teacher might look first at other students’ scores on the test to find 
those questions that were too hard for other students, and then how many of  those 
questions were on the test. (To improve the test, the teacher will also look for those 
questions that are too easy .)
Is there another way to find out if  the test was too hard?
Answer: Yes, the teacher can set a pass/fail criterion for the test. If  more than 15 per cent 
of  the students fail, the test is probably too hard for that particular group of  students.
Is there another possible explanation for a student’s score on a test?
Answer: Yes, the classroom environment may not be conducive to learning. It may be too 
unruly , making it difficult for students to pay attention. In contrast, the teacher may control 
students through punishment and fear, creating anxiety that interferes with learning. In 
either case, the number of  students failing a test would be higher than expected.
Should the teacher look to the student for explanation(s) of  the test score?
Answer: Yes. This is where a careful examination of  a student’s performance on the test 
can really help the teacher make decisions about corrective instruction. The student 
can also get information that will help her or him make decisions about learning 
strategies to use. If  the student’s score on the test is lower than usual for that student, 
the teacher can find out if  the student was sick or in some other way troubled on the 
day the test was taken.
Is the teacher a possible source of  explanations for students’ test scores?
Answer: The instruction a teacher provides is certainly a possible explanation for 
students’ test scores. This is one reason that a Table of  Specifications is so important 
in the process of  constructing a test. If  the test includes questions that the instruction 
didn’t cover or if  the test contains many questions on a topic that wasn’t emphasized 
in instruction, it isn’t surprising that students will make errors on the test. Again, 
many students’ scores will be affected by this problem.
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
100
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Activity for introducing the assessment tracker (30 minutes)
Tell the Student Teachers that in this activity they will be introduced to a tool called 
the assessment tracker, which will help them interpret students’ test scores. Explain 
that the example of  this tool was created by a teacher based on the ‘Sun, Earth, and 
the Moon Unit’ and the unit test. The student responses to the test are hypothetical.
Tell Student Teachers that teachers use different types of  tools to interpret students’ 
test scores, some of  which are very sophisticated computer programs. In this activity , 
they will learn to use a fairly simple tool called the assessment tracker. This can be 
created in a spreadsheet program or simply with pen and paper.
Divide Student Teachers into groups of  two or three and provide them with the 
‘ Assessment Tracker’ handout. Also provide the ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon Unit 
Test’ handout to use with the assessment tracker. Ask the groups to take some time 
to study the tracker and the ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’ unit test. Write down the 
features of  the assessment tracker and answer the following questions:
•	 What do the knowledge, comprehension, and application headings in the top row mean?
¡¡ They are the three learning objectives from Bloom’s Taxonomy represented  
 in the ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’ unit test.
•	 What do the numbers in the second row represent?
¡¡ They represent the test question numbers in each objective. For example,   
 question 30 on the test is a comprehension question.
•	 What do the numbers in the first column represent? 
¡¡ They represent the number of  students.
•	 How many students are in this class?
¡¡ Thirty-one students.
•	 What do the letters in the second column under ‘student’ represent? 
¡¡ They represent the initials of  student names.
•	 What do the numbers in the last column under ‘totals’ represent?
¡¡ They represent the number of  questions a student answered correctly . For   
 example A. A. got 30 out of  35 questions right.
•	 What do the numbers in the last row next to the heading ‘sum’ mean?
¡¡ They represent the number of  students that answered each question   
 correctly . For example, 29 out of  31 students got the first question right.
•	 What does the number ‘1’ entered in the cells of  the table mean?
¡¡ It means that the student answered that specific question correctly .
•	 What does ‘0’ entered in the cells mean?
¡¡ It means that the student did not get that answer right. 
NOTE: The answers provided here are for the Instructor, to be used after Student T eachers 
have finished answering questions and sharing their answers with the class.
101
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Give the groups 20 minutes to answer these questions and then go over the questions 
with the whole class. Ask the class each question one by one, take a few responses, 
and note down the correct answer on the board. Ask Student Teachers to make any 
corrections to their answers if  needed.
Closing (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to write a short paragraph on this topic: ‘Do you think the use 
of  an assessment tracker can improve your teaching? Why or why not?’
Homework
Ask Student Teachers to finish writing their response to the closing activity at home 
and be prepared to share it in the next class.
Session 2: Using the assessment tracker
In class today (5 minutes)
Topics include:
•	 A brief  discussion of  Student Teachers’ initial opinions of  the assessment tracker
•	 Practice identifying inappropriate questions (too easy or too hard) and eliminating  
 them from the test
•	 Practice adjusting each test takers’ score when the too-easy and too-hard   
 questions are eliminated
•	 Practice identifying those students who failed the test
•	 Practice interpreting the test performance of  those students who failed the test 
Individual and group activity: Using the assessment tracker (30 minutes)
Remind Student Teachers that they are using a record of  primary school students’ 
performance on the ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’ unit test that is hypothetical. Remind 
them, also, that the teacher who created the assessment tracker entered  the number 
‘1’ in a cell if  the test taker answered the  question correctly and a ‘0’ if  the test taker 
did not provide a correct answer to the question.
Give Student Teachers time to study the assessment tracker for the ‘Sun, Earth, and 
the Moon’ unit test. 
Tell Student Teachers that their first task is to identify test questions that are too easy and 
too hard for these test takers by using the assessment tracker. Usually teachers use their 
professional judgement to set a criterion for determining if  a question is too easy or too 
hard for students. For this test, if  15 per cent or fewer test takers answered a question 
incorrectly , it is safe to assume that the question was too easy . If  only 15 per cent or fewer 
students answered a question correctly , it is safe to assume that the question was too hard. 
In the case of  the ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’ test, 15 per cent translates into (15/100) * 31 
= 4.65 students, which can be rounded off  to 5. This means that if  five or fewer students 
answered a question incorrectly , it is a too easy , and if  five or fewer students answered a 
question correctly , it is too hard. Note: tell the Student Teachers that there are no research-
based rules for picking questions that are too easy or too hard. Teachers use professional 
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
102
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
judgement to set the criterion for what is too easy and what is too hard. (The teacher who 
created the assessment tracker they are using set the 15 per cent criterion described for 
questions in the ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’ unit test.)
Tell the Student Teachers that after picking questions that are too easy or too hard, 
they should eliminate those from the test and readjust the test score (overall as well as 
individual test scores) accordingly . For example, if  two questions are eliminated from 
the test, it will become a 33-question test (from a 35-question test). They will have to 
recalculate all test takers’ scores out of  a total score of  33. 
Give the Student Teachers time to identify the questions that are too easy (questions 
1, 16, 22, and 26) and too hard (questions 8 and 9). Eliminating these questions results 
in a test composed of  29 questions. After identifying and eliminating the questions 
that are too easy and too hard, have the Student Teachers adjust test scores for all the 
test takers.
The next interpretive task is to identify those students who fail to pass the test. Tell 
Student Teachers to rank the students from highest to lowest scores using the adjusted 
scores they created by eliminating the four questions that are too easy for these test 
takers and the two questions that are too hard. Again, the teacher who constructed 
the ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’ unit test and the assessment tracker for the test used 
professional judgement to set a pass/fail criterion. Tell the Student Teachers that 
sometimes pass/fail criteria are set by the school or the school district. 
For the purpose of  this test, the teacher’s pass/fail criterion is 55 per cent; that is, if  
a test taker answers 55 per cent or more of  the 29 (adjusted score) questions on the 
test correctly , they are given a passing grade. (Fifty-five per cent of  29 is 15.9, rounded 
off  to 16.) Tell the Student Teachers to use this criterion to make a list of  the students 
who were not able to pass the test. Using this criterion, three students (T . T ., C. 
W ., and Z. W .) failed the test. The teacher decided, based on information about the 
student from other sources, to include M. K. in the group that failed the test, although 
this student earned a score right at the cut-off  for passing.
Having identified those students who failed the test, the next and most important task 
facing the teacher is to decide on the additional help to provide for these students. 
This is purely a matter of  professional judgement, as is the decision to include the 
student who earned a passing score of  16 on the unit test with the students who will 
receive additional instruction on the content of  the ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’ unit. 
For their next task in this practice exercise, ask Student Teacher to select one of  
the four students identified for additional help and to circle the questions answered 
incorrectly by the student they chose. 
103
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
(Key for Instructor: M. K. missed questions 3, 7, 17, 18, 19, 23, 5, 13, 30, 34,11, 12, and 
14; Z. W . missed questions 3, 6, 18, 20, 23, 24, 27, 31, 2, 10, 30, 34, 11, and 12; C. W . 
missed questions 3, 4, 7, 17, 18, 20, 23, 24, 27, 31, 2, 10, 30, 34, 11, 21, and 25; and T . T . 
missed questions 3, 19, 28, 5, 10, 13, 35, 11, 14, 21, 29, 32, and 33.)  
Remind Student Teachers of  the obvious fact that when they are teaching, they will 
provide corrective instruction for all students who fail a test. In this course they are 
engaged in a practice exercise. 
Homework (10 minutes) 
Before class ends today , Student Teachers should have chosen one of  the four students 
identified for corrective instruction and recorded the questions that those students 
answered incorrectly on a copy of  the unit test. The homework assignment is to study 
those questions and identify the subject matter topics for corrective instruction. Each 
Student Teacher should come to the next class session with a written statement about 
the subject matter topics chosen for the student, the lessons from the ‘Sun, Earth, and 
the Moon’ unit that will be used to prepare lessons for the student, and an explanation 
for these choices based on data from the assessment tracker.  
Closing (5 minutes)
Revisit the discussion at the beginning of  this class session. Ask Student Teachers their 
opinion of  the assessment tracker’s value: 1) as a means for improving their teaching 
and 2) as a means for improving the test. Take as many responses from Student 
Teachers as time permits.
Session 3: Using the assessment tracker (cont.)
In class today (5 minutes) 
Topics and activities include:
•	 Small group discussions of  yesterday’s homework assignment
•	 Targeted feedback to a primary school student who performed well on the   
 ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’ unit test
•	 Opinions at this time about the value of  the assessment tracker to teaching   
 and learning
•	 Ideas for changing and improving the assessment tracker
Small group discussions: Planning corrective instruction for students who 
failed the ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’ unit test (25 minutes)
Guide Student Teachers to place themselves in groups based on the student whose test 
performance they chose to study (M. K., C. W ., Z. W ., or T . T .). Groups should not be 
larger than four Student Teachers. It will be necessary to create more than one group 
when more than four Student Teachers have chosen one of  the (hypothetical) students. 
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
104
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Tell each group to choose a reporter. Each group should have at least one copy of  
the assessment tracker and one copy of  the ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’ unit. Each 
Student Teacher will have their copy of  the unit test with the questions the student 
misidentified. Each Student Teacher will have the first phase of  a plan for corrective 
instruction for the student that, based on the assessment data, identifies the subject 
matter topics and lesson learning objectives as well as the unit lessons that present 
those topics. These initial plans are the focus of  the groups’ discussions. After 15 
minutes, call the Student Teachers together so that each group can share with the class.
Here is an example to share with Student Teachers after they have shared their work.  
It is not wise to proceed further with corrective lessons because the questions M. K. 
answered incorrectly are not available. Those errors are important for interpreting 
M. K.’s performance on the test. Help Student Teachers understand that the original 
unit lessons will not be repeated but do represent a starting place for planning 
corrective instruction.
Individual activity: Targeted feedback to a student who performed well on 
the ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’ unit test (20 minutes)  
Ask Student Teachers to write feedback to a student who earned a maximum score on 
the test after the score was adjusted. Make another copy of  the unit test available to 
Student Teachers. 
Tell Student Teachers feedback cannot be provided to other students in the group 
because their answers to the questions are not available. Student Teachers will 
probably agree that students who perform well on a test have an equal right to 
feedback as do those who earn lower scores.
Remind Student Teachers that feedback needs to be selective and should cause a 
student to think, and that praise by itself  doesn’t meet these conditions. After 10 
minutes of  individual work, tell Student Teachers to find a partner and exchange tests 
with feedback statements for feedback.
The student M. K. missed 13 questions, placing her at the cut-off  point for passing the test.  
She made an error on two questions each for three important concepts in the ‘Sun, Earth, 
and the Moon’ unit: distance affects size perception, celestial movement that produces 
day and night on Earth, and phases of  the Moon. While these six questions represent 
approximately half  the errors she made, the concepts are important to the goal of  unit. 
The concepts are important to further study of  the solar system. Focus for corrective 
instruction suggests that the new lessons would be created from subject matter content in 
Lessons 2, 5, and 7. Learning objectives for the corrective lessons might include: M. K. will 
understand the concept of  a scale model, M. K. will be able to explain the roles of  the Sun 
and Earth in creating day and night, and M. K. will understand the lunar/Moon cycle and 
be able to explain it in her own words.
105
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Group discussion: Opinions about the value of the assessment tracker 
for teaching and learning and ideas for improving the assessment 
tracker (10 minutes)
Class sessions this week have been used to introduce one framework for interpreting 
test scores. Student Teachers now have some experience with test interpretation. The 
purpose of  this last session of  the week is to hear their opinions about the assessment 
tracker they have been using and their ideas about making the tracker easier to use 
and/or more useful. Suggest that Student Teachers make notes about this discussion 
in their course notebooks.
One example is that the assessment tracker does not provide any feedback about what 
wrong answers the test takers chose. This can easily be improved for multiple-choice 
and true-false questions by inserting the wrong answer instead of  ‘0’ in the assessment 
tracker. By doing so, teachers can provide students with more targeted help.
Closing (5 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to leave their homework assignments that they used in class 
today on your desk as they leave class. 
Remind them to bring the science unit lessons for which they wrote learning 
objectives, assessment targets, success criteria, and assessment tools and activities with 
them to the next session.
 UNIT     5  REVIEW THROUGH 
 PRACTICE
107
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
UNIT 5: REVIEW THROUGH PRACTICE
(2 weeks/6 hours)
T eaching and learning resources for Unit 5
Handout for Student T eachers
Week 15
‘Unit 5, Week, 15, Session 1: Sample Lesson Plans with Embedded Assessment Plans’
 
Week 15: Writing an assessment-
embedded lesson plan 
Session 1: Preparation for writing a lesson plan with an 
embedded assessment plan
At the end of  the previous session, Student Teachers were asked to bring to class the 
science unit lessons for which they wrote learning objectives, assessment targets, 
success criteria, and assessment tools and activities. 
T oday in class (5 minutes)
The outline for today’s class:
•	 Review the difference between learning goal, learning objective, and learning target.
•	 Review the meaning of  success criteria.
•	 Elicit illustrations of  learning objectives, learning targets, and success criteria   
 from Student Teachers using their work with lessons from the solar system unit.
•	 Elicit illustrations of  assessment tools and procedures from Student Teachers   
 using their work with lessons from the solar system unit.
•	 Study lesson plans with embedded assessment plans in school subjects other   
 than science.
•	 Create a lesson plan template using lesson plans in science, English, and math.
•	 Homework assignment.
Review the meaning of learning goal, learning objective, and learning 
target (10 minutes)
If  you look back through the course guide to Unit 2, Week 4, Session 1, you will find 
the definitions of  learning goal, learning objective, and learning target. The intent here is 
to have students use their notes to review the meanings of  these concepts. If  they have 
difficulty , write the meanings on chart paper and post it on the wall. Perhaps these 
concepts should be left visible throughout the week. Though this is a review lesson, 
you might want to add some information about goals that was not included in the 
original lesson. You might want to add that a goal is a broad statement of  a desired 
outcome. A goal is composed of  several objectives and does not have a specific, 
measurable outcome. Goals are usually long term, while objectives are to be achieved 
by the end of  a lesson.
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
108
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Review the meaning of success criteria (5 minutes)
Success criteria is a concept that is also defined in Session 1 of  Week 4. Again, rely on 
the Student Teachers to produce the definition. Assist them only if  they are struggling 
with the meaning.
Elicit examples of learning objectives, learning targets, and success criteria 
from Student Teachers (10 minutes)
These examples come from lessons in the solar system unit. Student Teachers will 
cite examples they wrote into the lessons they used from the unit during Week 4. You 
might want to start this segment of  today’s session by reminding them of  the learning 
goal of  the solar system unit (Unit 2, Week 4, Session 1). If  you find that they were 
not as precise when they wrote the objectives, targets, and criteria for the solar system 
lessons, you can give them the following example from another subject:
Learning objectives: Students will be able to define the English word homophone
Students will be able to give three examples of  
homophone pairs
Learning targets: Students will define the word homophone
Students will write three examples of  homophone pairs
Success criteria:  Students’ definitions will include the phrases ‘sound the 
same, spellings and meanings are different’
Students’ written examples will include correct spellings 
and definitions. 
Example: heal (to get back health), heel (the back part of  
the foot)
Small group work: Recalling the assessment tools that have been used or 
studied in the course (10 minutes)
Form groups of  four or five students. Ask each group to list all of  the assessment tools 
they have either worked with or read about during the course. The tools that have 
been created, used, and/or studied or discussed are monitoring logs (teacher), subject 
matter journals (students), structured observation, interviews, anecdotal records, 
essays, projects, summative tests, and portfolios. In addition, Student Teachers have 
created or studied record-keeping devices for assessment data: a line graph and 
different forms for recording assessment data (calories and exercise minutes per day , 
performance on a math quiz, and student participation in class discussions). 
Invite one group to report. After they have reported their list, invite other groups to 
add anything that is missing. If  convenient, copy the complete list and give it to each 
Student Teacher at the beginning of  the next class. The list may help them choose 
assessment tools for their lesson plans.
109
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Small group work: Discussion of English and math lesson plans with 
embedded assessment plans (5 minutes)
Hand out the lesson plans in English and math (‘Sample Lesson Plans with Embedded 
Assessment Plans’). Tell Student Teachers to look just at the lesson plan format and 
compare it with the format for the science lessons in the solar system unit. The 
purpose is to determine if  the two templates are the same or different.
Create a template for a lesson plan (10 minutes)
Remind Student Teachers that there are several ways to structure a lesson plan. The 
lesson plans in English and math have essentially the same structure as the science 
lessons they have been looking at throughout the course. 
Choose two Student Teachers whose penmanship and English are good. They will be 
the scribes. (To avoid fatigue, they can split the task in half.) While you guide Student 
Teachers to identify each element of  the lesson plan structure, the scribes will write it 
in outline form on the chart paper. 
Use their ideas to create a lesson planning template that may look something like this:
Subject:
T opic:
Grade level:
Time required:
Learning objectives:
Learning targets:
Success criteria:
Assessment tools:
Materials required for the lesson:
New vocabulary in the lesson:
Introduction to the lesson: connections to prior knowledge
Guiding questions
Exploration 1
Guiding questions
Exploration 2
Guiding questions
Exploration 3
Guiding questions
NOTE: These explorations are the equivalent of learning activities and pacing in other lesson 
plan templates. The number of explorations depends upon the subject and topic.
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
110
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Culminating activity: Assessment
Remind Student Teachers that although the template includes a culminating activity 
for assessment, they should remember that assessment can occur at any point in the 
lesson and that questions are an important assessment tool.
Homework (5 minutes)
Tell Student Teachers that their assignment is to choose a topic for their lesson plan 
and that it should be submitted to you at the end of  the third session this week. They 
can choose any topic, but they should follow the template. 
Their lesson plan should demonstrate how to embed assessments that are valid 
indicators of  success criteria in the lesson; that is, how to make assessment part of  
teaching and learning.
Sessions 2 and 3
Student Teachers will complete their lesson plans in class during Sessions 2 and 3. 
Feedback from a partner is an important part of  the process. One feedback session 
should be scheduled in the last 20 minutes of  Session 2. A second feedback session 
should be scheduled midway through Session 3. The outcomes from these feedback 
sessions can be shared with the class in the last 15 minutes of  Session 3. 
Week 16: Writing a test based on essay 
questions that could be used as a final 
examination for this course 
Session 1: Preparing to write essay questions for a  
final examination
Although Student Teachers in this course have studied essay questions, they have 
not yet tried to write them. Researchers have determined that writing and answering 
test questions for a test you are about to take is a particularly good way to study 
for the test. The purpose of  this week’s work is to 1) give Student Teachers the 
opportunity to practice writing essay questions using topics covered in this course 
and 2) simultaneously provide the opportunity for the Student Teachers to review 
the content of  the Classroom Assessment course. If  the books are available, Student 
Teachers should refresh their memory about essay questions by re-reading McMillan, 
pages 202–215, and Miller, Linn, and Gronlund, pages 232–250.  
Although effective writing is a foundation for written communication that reveals 
knowledge and reasoning skills, essay test questions are not primarily tests of  writing 
skill. Essay questions are primarily a test of  how much a student knows about a 
particular topic and how well she or he can think using that knowledge. To say this 
another way , teachers develop tests of  writing skill that are different from essay tests, 
which are intended to assess higher-order mental processes. Essay questions are the 
test of  choice when a teacher wants to assess students’ ability to think and reason. 
This distinction between a test of  writing skill and a written test of  reasoning skills is 
important for teachers to understand.
111
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Essay questions are a very powerful. With essay questions, there is one question or 
proposition that allows the student to demonstrate reasoning. Essay questions demand 
the use of  higher-level thinking skills such as analysis, synthesis, and evaluation. 
Given the importance of  learning how to write good essay questions and the fact that 
this may be the first practice session for these Student Teachers, you can exercise the 
option of  providing lots of  opportunity for feedback on their work but not grading 
it. The assumption here is that Student Teachers will feel freer to be creative and take 
risks with the questions they write if  they know they will not be graded. If, however, 
you gave them opportunity to practice writing essay questions in Week 8 with good 
feedback on their work, you may want to give them grades on these questions. They 
should know in advance whether their questions will be graded or not. Finally , be sure 
they know in advance that the content of  their questions comes from the content of  
the Classroom Assessment course.
In class today (5 minutes)
The first 40 minutes of  this session will be used to review guidelines for writing 
essay questions. The remaining 20 minutes will be used to review the content of  the 
Classroom Assessment course. The agenda for today:
•	 Review the purpose and limitations of  essay questions (5 minutes)
•	 Review the difference between restricted-response essay questions and   
 extended-response essay questions (10 minutes)
•	 Examine types of  thought questions and related item stems (15 minutes)
•	 Scoring essay questions: The practice of  composing an outline of  an acceptable  
 answer or an example of  an acceptable answer (10 minutes)
•	 Small group study of  course syllabus to identify topics for essay questions  
 (10 minutes)
•	 Class discussion of  course topics for essay questions (10 minutes)
•	 Closing (5 minutes)
Question and answer interaction: Purpose and limitations of essay 
questions (5 minutes)
NOTE: You and the Student T eachers studied essay questions in Week 8. The first part of 
this session is an opportunity for Student T eachers to review what they have previously 
learned. Use questions to prompt them to recall knowledge they should have.
Ask the question, ‘What do essay questions assess?’ 
•	 If  properly written, an essay question requires the person answering the 
question to organize, integrate, and interpret information; to argue for a point 
of  view; and to evaluate ideas.
•	 Essay questions assess complex thinking that is difficult to assess with objective 
test items.
•	 Essay questions require the person answering the question to compose rather 
than select an answer.
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
112
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Ask the question, ‘What are the limitations of  essay questions?’
•	 Essay questions seem to be easy to write, but that is a misconception. Essay 
questions often assess factual knowledge rather than reasoning. That is a mistake. 
•	 Essay questions are very hard to score reliably . Studies show that one teacher 
grading the same tests twice will give different grades to the same test the 
second time. Scoring essay tests is unreliable.
•	 Essay questions are focused on just one or two topics. 
NOTE: If necessary, ask more than one Student T eacher to respond to each of these 
questions by asking, ‘Does anyone want to add to their answer?’
Presentation: Differences between restricted-response essay questions 
and extended-response essay questions (10 minutes)
Share an example of  a restricted-response essay question. For example: ‘Using your 
own words, explain two differences between igneous and sedentary rocks and give 
one example of  each not discussed in class’. 
Extended-response questions allow the student to determine the length and 
complexity of  the answer. This type of  question is most useful at the analysis, 
synthesis, and evaluation levels of  cognitive complexity . 
Here is an example of  an extended response question: ‘Compare and contrast the 
presidential administrations of  Pervaiz Musharraf  and Asif  Ali Zardari. Consider 
economic, social, and military policies. Avoid taking a position in support of  either 
president. Your answer will be judged on objectivity , organization, accuracy ,  
and clarity’.
Presentation and small group work: Types of thought questions 
and sample item stems (15 minutes)
For this presentation, use the material on pages 240 and 241 of  the text by Miller, 
Linn, and Gronlund. Select five of  the thought questions (such as comparing, 
explaining, and persuading) that you think are most likely to be used by primary 
school teachers in Pakistan and write them on the board or chart paper. Underneath 
each thought question, write the item stems.
Example: Comparing
Describe the similarities and differences between ______.
Compare the following two methods for ______.
113
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Tell Student Teachers to assemble quickly into five groups and choose a reporter. 
Assign each group one type of  thought question and give them five minutes to write 
one restricted-response essay question and one extended-response essay question 
using the item stems. If  time permits, have each group read one of  the essay questions 
the group wrote to the class.
Presentation on scoring essay questions (10 minutes)
Remind the class that essay questions are very hard to grade. Remind them, also, that 
essay questions can be graded using a holistic method or an analytic method and that 
each method is described in the textbooks for the course. Tell them that writing an 
outline identifying criteria for a good answer when they write the question will help 
them grade the answer. Or they can put themselves in the role of  the student when 
they write the question and also write the answer, using the answer as a model when 
grading the students’ answers.
Return to the questions they wrote in response to the thought questions and item 
stems on the board/chart paper. Choose one of  the questions. Ask the Student 
Teachers as a class to think about the criteria a teacher could use to grade the answer 
to that question. If  you have time, do this with two of  the questions written by the 
small groups.
Small group study of the course syllabus to identify topics for essay 
questions on a final examination (10 minutes)
Student Teachers can remain in the groups they formed when they studied types of  
thought questions and related item stems. They have a reporter. Ask them to scan the 
course syllabus and identify topics for both restricted-response and extended-response 
essay questions.
Class discussion of course topics for essay questions on a final 
examination (10 minutes)
As each group reports the topics that the group identified as course topics for essay 
questions on a final examination, write the topic on the board or chart paper. These 
topics, along with the types of  thought questions and item stems, can remain in public 
view during the next two class sessions as Student Teachers write their essay questions.
Closing (5 minutes)
Tell Student Teachers that the remaining sessions of  the course will be used to write 
essay questions based on topics covered in the Classroom Assessment course. Though 
they will depend upon each other for feedback, each Student Teacher will write 
their own questions. This is the time to tell them if  the questions will be graded. 
Suggest that they review their course notebooks as homework before the next class. 
Recommend that they bring their notebooks to class as an aid to selecting topics and 
developing questions. Their copy of  the course syllabus might be helpful, too.
COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Assessment
114
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Sessions 2 and 3
The end product of  work in the second week of  the unit is an essay test based on the 
content of  this course. The number of  questions will depend on the length of  the 
examination period. That should be specified at the beginning of  the second session.
This experience will be enhanced for Student Teachers if  they are required to develop 
grading criteria for at least one of  their essay questions. 
At the beginning of  the second session, Student Teachers can exchange the ques -
tions for which they wrote the scoring criteria with their feedback partners. Each 
person keeps the grading criteria they developed for the question without showing 
the criteria to the feedback partner. The partners will answer each other’s questions 
and then return them to the writer for marking. Each partner should see how her or 
his answer was marked.
The essay tests must be finished before the start of  Session 3. Session 3 is devoted to 
answering partner’s questions and then marking partner’s answers using the criteria 
developed while writing the question. Each partner is allowed to see the way her or 
his answer was marked.
Course resources
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
116
Unit 1, week 2, session 2
National Professional Standards for T eachers 
in Pakistan (NPSTP): Standard 5 Assessment
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4
5.1 
Linked to 
learning 
outcomes
Formal and 
informal 
assessment is 
conducted in a 
general way not 
clearly linked 
to learning 
outcomes or 
instruction.
Formal assessment 
is linked to planned 
learning outcomes 
and a variety 
of appropriate 
assessment 
strategy(ies) are 
used. Informal 
assessment is still 
general in nature.
Formal and informal 
assessment is clearly 
linked to planned learning 
outcomes using a variety 
of  assessment strategies. 
Assessment is fully 
integrated into teaching 
and learning planning 
and classroom activities 
to achieve ILO’s.
Assessment is linked to planned 
learning outcomes and a range 
of  strategies are used effectively 
to assess learning; assessment 
is integrated into teaching 
and learning and there is a 
belief that children’s learning 
outcomes are the basis for 
growth and development and 
opportunities for learning for 
the children and the teacher.
5.2 
Formative 
Assessment
Occasionally 
checks for 
understand of  
the whole class in 
general, but does 
not use this to 
change teaching 
or reinforce 
learning.
Conducts formative 
assessment through 
continuous checking 
for understanding 
throughout the les-
son. Uses standard 
assessment tools 
for the whole group 
to ensure that all 
children are learning 
progressively and 
attempts to modify 
teaching as a result.
Plans and conducts 
formative assessment 
through continuous 
checking for understanding. 
Uses a variety of teaching 
strategies to assess how 
children are learning, what 
they know , what they are 
able to do, and what kinds 
of learning experiences 
will support further 
growth and development. 
Modifies teaching based 
on assessment data.
Plans and conducts a variety 
of  formative assessment 
measures using teaching 
strategies that provide 
opportunities for continuous 
checking for understanding 
and uses these to change 
teaching and reinforce 
learning during the 
lesson. Sets and modifies 
appropriate teaching and 
learning objectives.
5.3 
Summative 
Assessment
Assessment of  
child’s learning 
is conducted in 
traditional ‘test 
taking’ manner 
with very little 
variety and 
opportunity 
for children to 
display a variety 
of  strengths and 
learning. 
Assessment of 
child’s learning /
progress includes a 
variety of fair and 
objective assessment 
tools, which provide 
an opportunity for 
children to display a 
variety of strengths 
and learning. 
Assessment of  child’s 
learning /progress 
includes a variety of  fair 
and objective assessment 
tools including self-made 
tools (based on theo-
retical knowledge and 
experience in the class-
room) which provide an 
opportunity for children 
to showcase a variety of 
strengths and learning. 
Assessment of  child’s learning /
progress includes a variety of  fair 
and objective assessment tools 
including self-made tools (based 
on theoretical knowledge and 
experience in the classroom) 
which provide an opportunity 
for children to display a variety 
of  strengths and learning. 
Accurately documents, reports 
assessment data, and ongoing 
child’s achievement, to parents 
and professional staff.
5.4 
Providing 
feedback
Provides basic 
feedback to 
children in a 
general way 
within class and 
on written work.
Provides feedback 
to children, which is 
sometimes specific 
and constructive 
in class. Written 
feedback is starting to 
become constructive 
and specific.
Provides feedback to 
children within class and 
on written work, which 
is consistently specific 
and constructive.
Provides feedback to children, 
which is consistently specific 
and constructive. Coaches 
children to engage in 
objective self-assessment 
and monitor their progress 
towards achieving their 
personal goals.
S
117
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
NPSTP Standard 5 Assessment (by level)
Level 1
•	 Formal and informal assessment is conducted in a general way not clearly 
linked to learning outcomes or instruction.
•	 Occasionally checks for understanding of  the whole class in general, but does 
not use this to change teaching or reinforce learning.
•	 Assessment of  child’s learning is conducted in traditional ‘test taking’ manner 
with very little variety and opportunity for children to display a variety of  
strengths and learning.  
•	 Provides basic feedback to children in a general way within class and on written work.
Level 2
•	 Formal assessment is linked to planned learning outcomes and a variety of  
appropriate assessment strategy(ies) are used. Informal assessment is still 
general in nature.
•	 Conducts formative assessment through continuous checking for understand-
ing throughout the lesson. Uses standard assessment tools for the whole group 
to ensure that all children are learning progressively and attempts to modify 
teaching as a result.
•	 Assessment of  child’s learning/progress includes a variety of  fair and objective 
assessment tools, which provide an opportunity for children to display a variety 
of  strengths and learning.  
•	 Provides feedback to children, which is sometimes specific and constructive in 
class. Written feedback is starting to become constructive and specific.
Level 3
•	 Formal and informal assessment is clearly linked to planned learning outcomes 
using a variety of  assessment strategies. Assessment is fully integrated into 
teaching and learning planning and classroom activities to achieve ILOs.
•	 Plans and conducts formative assessment through continuous checking for 
understanding. Uses a variety of  teaching strategies to assess how children are 
learning, what they know , what they are able to do, and what kinds of  learning 
experiences will support further growth and development. Modifies teaching 
based on assessment data.
•	 Assessment of  child’s learning/progress includes a variety of  fair and objective 
assessment tools including self-made tools (based on theoretical knowledge 
and experience in the classroom), which provide an opportunity for children to 
showcase a variety of  strengths and learning.  
•	 Provides feedback to children within class and on written work, which is 
consistently specific and constructive.
Level 4
•	 Assessment is linked to planned learning outcomes and a range of  strategies 
is used effectively to assess learning; assessment is integrated into teaching 
and learning, and there is a belief  that child-learning outcomes are the basis 
for growth and development and opportunities for learning for the children 
and the teacher. 
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
118
•	 Plans and conducts a variety of  formative assessment measures using teaching 
strategies that provide opportunities for continuous checking for understanding 
and uses these to change teaching and reinforce learning during the lesson. Sets 
and modifies appropriate teaching and learning objectives. 
•	 Assessment of  child’s learning/progress includes a variety of  fair and objective 
assessment tools including self-made tools (based on theoretical knowledge and 
experience in the classroom) that provide an opportunity for children to display 
a variety of  strengths and learning. Accurately documents, reports assessment 
data and ongoing child’s achievement to parents and professional staff. 
•	 Provides feedback to children, which is consistently specific and constructive. 
Coaches children to engage in objective self-assessment and monitor their 
progress toward achieving their personal goals.
Notes on the use of the assessment standards: 
This is one of  10 Professional Standards for Teachers adopted by the Policy and 
Planning Wing of  Pakistan’s Ministry of  Education in 2009. The Standards are includ-
ed in the Student Teaching Handbook for the Semester 3 practicum. Students should 
know how a standard is different from a goal and an objective. A standard is an approved 
example of  a desired result. In this case the Professional Standards for Teachers in 
Pakistan represent knowledge that a person must have and skills that person must 
demonstrate to be considered competent to teach. A standard is more comprehensive 
than a goal: a goal is more comprehensive than an objective. Using Standard 5 as an 
example: assessment integrated into teaching and learning is a standard, lesson plans 
that include an assessment plan is a goal, assessment criteria in the plan that are a valid 
indicator of  the lesson’s learning outcome(s) is an objective.
The rubric for the standard is presented in two ways: as a table and as a list. The 
purpose of  including these rubrics in the course is twofold: 1) to familiarize Student 
Teachers with the assessment standards they are expected to achieve by the time they 
complete the teacher education program in which they are enrolled: and 2) to identify 
those experiences in the Classroom Assessment course that should help them acquire 
some of  the knowledge and develop some of  the skills the assessment standard requires.  
Student Teachers write a lesson plan that includes an assessment plan. Prior to writing 
their own plan, they study lesson plans that include assessment plans and practice 
writing learning objectives (outcomes) with linked assessment targets. They also prac-
tice writing assessment activities into existing lesson plans. Throughout the course 
they see examples of  assessment tools; they conduct an interview and observation 
and design an informal math assessment. They also design a performance assessment 
and write a test composed of  essay questions. They construct an objective test from 
a blueprint they created and study how to revise a test. Finally , they practice learning 
to give constructive feedback throughout the course by exchanging their practice 
exercises with a partner and giving feedback to each other.
As you teach the course you will find that it doesn’t provide instruction and practice 
for all the skills and related knowledge contained in Standard 5. Identify skills that 
are missing and, if  you have time, talk with Student Teachers about how they might 
practice some of  them in the Semester 4 practicum. Student Teachers engage in 
a self-assessment based on the NPSTP at the end of  the Semester 4 practicum. A 
dialogue in class throughout the course focused on expectations in Standard 5 and the 
course experiences that relate to those expectations can help with that assessment.
119
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 1, week 1, session 2
Assessment helps Asim gain weight
Twelve-year old Asim sits with his legs hanging from the clinic bed in the doctor’s office 
and asks his mother, ‘How long will this take? My friends are waiting for me to play 
cricket. We’ve been waiting too long!’ Dr Qureshi walks in at that moment clutching 
Asim’s files. ‘Good morning, Naema. Good morning Asim. So, why are we here today?’
‘Good morning, Dr Qureshi. I have just come for his regular health examination. And 
I am afraid he is not gaining weight’. 
‘Hmm. Let’s see what is happening’. Dr Qureshi moves through his regular health 
examination procedures: he checks Asim’s ears, heart, and respiratory system. ‘ Asim, 
please get on the scale so we can check your weight’. Asim lifts himself  off  of  the bed 
and moves to the scale. Dr Qureshi moves the numbers on the balance beam on the 
scale until it comes to balance. He copies down the number onto Asim’s medical chart. 
‘Naema, it’s like they say , never underestimate a mother’s hunch. You are right. Asim’s 
weight is quite below the average he should be at this age. He is more than one 
standard deviation below where he should be. This is not good, but we can easily fix 
this! You have to be ready’, he declares while looking directly at Asim.
‘We will set a weight gain goal for eight weeks from now . Asim, I’ve written down 
your goal here and will also give this to you. Naema, make sure he eats at least one 
cup of  curd, roti with butter, and vegetables every day . He should also have one cup 
of  lentils or meat twice a day to increase his protein. In this booklet, you will find the 
calorie count for different types of  food depending on the serving. Every day , Asim 
should be eating 2500 calories. In this book, Asim, you will log the calories so you can 
make sure that you are eating the amount you need to gain the weight we have set 
as your goal. Every other day , you should weigh yourself  to see the progress you are 
making. Naema, I’ve written down the approximate weight gain Asim should have 
each week to reach the eight-week goal. In this book I gave you, Asim, you should also 
log the amount of  time that you exercise, as you use calories during that time. You’ll 
have to factor that in to ensure that you are eating enough. This will increase the 
amount of  calories you intake daily , which will be very good for you to gain weight. 
Asim, tell me what this will help do and why we are doing this’. 
‘Dr Qureshi, I don’t weigh enough, so I have to gain more weight! This way I can 
track my progress to the goal we set’. 
‘Exactly , Asim. Naema, do you have any questions? Be sure to let Asim do most of  the 
recording and tracking. It will be important for him to take control of  this process’. 
‘Okay . I will report back to you. This monitoring will help’.
S
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
120
Naema and her husband post the monitoring document on their cupboard in their 
kitchen so that Asim could reach it. The family travels to the market in the evening 
to pick up important foods Dr Qureshi has asked them to add to Asim’s diet. At the 
market, Asim requests various items.
‘I want toffees!’, cries Asim.
‘Toffees aren’t good for you’, says Naema. 
‘Okay , what about guava and bananas?’
‘Yes, let’s get some fruit’.  
‘ Asim’s family is diligent and persistent. With Asim at their side, they plan out his 
meals at the beginning of  the week. Asim records his calories daily (see Figure 1) and 
subtracts the amount of  calories he has used from exercising. Every other day , as the 
doctor has requested, Asim weighs himself  and also records this information. 
At the end of  the first week, Naema and Asim are dismayed that he has not gained 
additional weight despite their concentrated efforts. ‘It’s okay , Ma. We will keep trying’, 
Asim reassures her. ‘I think I played a lot of  cricket on Thursday , and didn’t eat enough 
calories. That might have been a problem. That happened a couple times this week’.
 
At the end of  the second week, Naema, her husband, and Asim sit down for tea and 
look at Asim’s monitoring and tracking log. To their dismay , they find that he has only 
gained one kilogram. At this rate, they realize that Asim will be far from meeting his 
eight-week goal. Naema calls Dr Qureshi to seek advice, and the doctor asks Naema 
to bring Asim in to the clinic.
Naema and Asim go to Dr Qureshi’s clinic. ‘This is surprising. I’m glad you came’. 
Dr Qureshi, the plan you gave us is not working’, Asim exclaimed. Dr Qureshi chuckles, 
and responds, ‘I know . Asim. I’m going to make a new plan for us to try’.
‘I also played too much cricket and didn’t eat enough a couple days, so maybe it’s my 
fault’, Asim confesses. 
‘We’ll find a solution’, assures Dr Qureshi.
Dr Qureshi takes multiple tests and draws Asim’s blood to gather more information.
‘Okay , let’s change a couple things in your diet. Naema, why don’t you add some 
more protein and have Asim drink three cups of  milk daily . Asim, make sure you keep 
exercising to build muscle, but eat enough calories daily . Let’s see what that does. 
Keep tracking this information as you have been doing’. 
121
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Naema and her husband become even more diligent about the food Asim eats. At the 
end of  the third week, Asim gains three kilograms, and at the end of  the fourth week, 
he is on track to meeting the eight-week goal. ‘Look at my arms! They’re bigger’, 
Asim confirms. Naema calls the doctor to inform him of  this news.
‘That’s wonderful, Naema. Please pass the phone to Asim’. Naema hands Asim the 
phone, and Dr Qureshi says, ‘Tell me Asim, what are you learning about what kinds 
of  foods help you gain weight?’
‘Dr Qureshi, I have to eat a lot more protein but can’t forget other foods. When I 
exercise too, it becomes muscle’.
‘That’s right!’   
At the end of  the eight weeks, Asim has nearly reached his targeted goal for weight 
gain prescribed by his doctor.
Figure 1: Asim’s monitoring chart 
Day Sunday Monday Tuesday W ednesdayThursday Friday Saturday
Calories 
consumed 3000 2500 2800 2950 2500 2600 2,700
Exercise 
(calories 
used) 
300 
(cricket)
200 
(bike)
250 
(cricket)
300 
(cricket)
300 
(cricket) ___ ___
T otal 
calories 2700 2300 2550 2650 2200 2600 2,700
W eight 
(kg) 30 kg 30 kg 30 kg
Figure 2: Asim’s weight gain
0	  
5	  
10	  
15	  
20	  
25	  
30	  
35	  
40	  
45	  
Week	  1	   Week	  2	   Week	  3	   Week	  4	   Week	  5	   Week	  6	   Week	  7	   Week	  8	  
Weight	  in	  kilograms	  
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
122
Discussion questions 
1) You learned about formative assessment in Session 1. What features of  
formative assessment do you see in this example? 
2) Learning goals drive instruction. What is a primary goal in this example, and 
how does this goal drive the action plan? What secondary goals are present, and 
what efforts are made toward those goals?
3) When and why are modifications to the action plan made? How might this 
compare to classroom practices?
4) In what ways does Dr Qureshi have Asim take charge of  his goal? Why is 
this important? 
5) How do the data records, both the chart and the graph, influence the action plan?
123
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 1, week 1, session 2
Assessment in a lesson about the 
solar system
Lesson 1: Objects in the sky
Learning objectives
Students will:
 l understand that the universe is vast and has millions of  different types of  objects, 
including our solar system
 l understand that the Sun is the centre of  our solar system, which has eight planets.
 l recognize the position of  the Sun, Earth, and its Moon in the solar system
 l know that all the planets revolve around the Sun in a circular path
 l know the meaning of  orbit and that paths of  the planets around the Sun are 
called orbits.
Learning targets
Students will:
•	 understand that Sun is the centre of  our solar system, which has eight planets
•	 recognize the position of  the Sun, Earth, and its Moon in the solar system
•	 know that all the planets revolve around the Sun in a circular path called an orbit.
Success criteria
Students will:
•	 write the names of  all eight planets in correct order
•	 draw a labelled diagram of  the Sun, Earth, and the Moon to show their   
 correct positions
•	 draw and label the paths of  the Earth and Moon. 
Vocabulary
solar system, planets, Sun, orbit, Moon, star
Advanced preparation
Assign the students the following homework the day before this lesson:
•	 Spend 10 minutes observing the sky at night and write and draw the objects  
 in the sky .
•	 Write about your experiences and reactions while viewing the sky .
S
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
124
Materials required
•	 Chart paper 
•	 Internet connection 
•	 Video projector
Introduction (connections to prior knowledge)
Initiate a discussion to find out what students already know about the solar system, 
Earth, Sun, and the Moon. Ask students the following questions to conduct a class 
discussion:
•	 What do you know about the Sun?
•	 What do you know about the Earth?
•	 What do you know about the Moon?
•	 How are the Sun, Earth, and the Moon related?
Note student replies on a piece of  chart paper so they can be used later in this lesson 
or the unit.
Exploration 1
Take students to the play yard and ask them to observe the sky and note the objects 
they see. The students should write and/or draw these objects. Encourage the 
students to draw any observations or conclusions about the size and number of  
objects or any other observations about the sky in general.  
Ask the students to make a comprehensive list of  images from the day and night skies. 
Ask the students to note down the objects that they think exist in the sky but might 
not have been visible to them during the day and night observations.
Share
Bring all the students back to the classroom and give them a chance to share 
their observations.
Note students’ observations on a chart paper.
Initiate a class discussion about the students’ experiences during their sky observations. 
Use the following guiding questions and write the students’ responses on the blackboard.
Guiding questions
•	 What are the different types of  objects you saw in the sky?
•	 Were all the objects in the sky visible to us? Might there be other objects in the 
sky? Name them.
•	 What do you know about the Sun? 
•	 Ask the students to write down at least three things they know about the solar system.
•	 Take a few student volunteers and ask them to share their responses with the 
rest of  the class. Write these responses on the blackboard. 
125
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Exploration 2
In this activity , students will act like young astronauts and take a trip to the solar 
system through a short video.
During the video, students should write down and/or draw at least five interesting 
things about the solar system.
Show the following video, ‘Solar System Animation for Kids’, to the class. The video is 
7 minutes and 41 seconds long: 
 Ø http://www .youtube.com/watch?v=sJrDiUG2JAo
Notes 
This video features the following concepts:
•	 Even things big in size will look smaller from a distance. This gives the children 
an idea that the stars and planets look small from the Earth because they are 
really far away .
•	 It showcases the solar system and its planets and gives the order of  the planets.
•	 It goes over the sizes of  different planets and their few distinguishing features.
Share
Tell the students, ‘Now that our space trip is over, let us share what we observed 
during our journey to space’. Take responses from as many students as time allows 
and note them on the blackboard. 
Ask the students to write these responses in their science notebooks.
Guiding questions
Initiate a class discussion to give students a chance to share their observations with the 
whole class. Use the following guiding questions to conduct the classroom discussion 
and note students’ responses on the blackboard. Ask the students to write their 
classmates’ observations in their science notebooks. 
•	 Describe the solar system in your own words.
•	 Why do objects in space seem so small?
•	 What is the position of  our Earth and Moon in the solar system? Is the Moon  
 also a planet?
•	 Is the Moon smaller, bigger, or the same size as the Sun? Why?
•	 Are planets stationary or in motion? Can anyone describe their motion?
•	 What are the paths of  the planets called? Where does that name come from?
Ask students to note these observations in their notebooks if  they have missed them 
during the video.
Refer to the chart paper from the introduction activity and Exploration 1 and explore 
with the students how and why their responses have changed or not changed after 
their virtual tour to the solar system.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
126
Culminating activity
Formative assessment: Ask the students to write down the names of  the eight 
planets in correct order.
Formative assessment: Ask the students to also draw a labelled diagram of  the Sun, 
Earth, and the Moon in their correct positions. Also draw and label the paths of  the 
Earth and the Moon.
NOTE: At this point, students can use their judgement to capture the sizes in this diagram. 
Go over the formative assessment answers with the students.
Ask a few students to share their answers with the class. Make corrections if  needed. 
Ask all the students to check their answers and make any corrections if  needed. 
Tell students that they will further explore the relative sizes of  the Sun, Moon, and the 
Earth in the next lesson. 
Additional resources
This site has cool animations of  the movement of  the solar system and other 
celestial objects.
 Ø http://www .kidsastronomy .com/solar_system.htm
This site has a lot of  useful information on the solar system and also contains some 
great pictures of  the solar system.
 Ø http://science.nationalgeographic.com/science/space/solar-system
127
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 1, week 1, session 2
Assessment in Ms Khan’s grade 4 class
Introduction
Using Pakistan’s 2006–2007 National Curriculum, Ms Khan created a science unit on the 
solar system for her grade 4 students. The fourth of  seven lessons intends for students to 
learn how the Earth moves in relation to the Sun and Moon. 
At the end of  the lesson yesterday , Ms Khan gave a 10-item short-answer quiz. Twenty of  
her 31 students made errors on the questions about rotation and revolution. She looked 
at the papers of  the 11 students whose answers to those questions were correct and found 
that only four had earned the highest scores on previous quizzes. This analysis led her to 
believe that students who scored correctly were not necessarily the smartest students in 
the class who could answer any type of  question no matter how it was phrased. This led 
her to conclude that the problem was not in the phrasing of  the question. Rather, students 
misunderstood the concepts that the questions attempted to address. 
Consequently , she decided to reteach those concepts today using an English-language 
video she didn’t use yesterday because she thought the English narration was too 
advanced for her students. The video uses three-dimensional models of  the movements 
of  the Earth in relation to the Sun and Moon. She decided to pause the video more 
frequently than she would ordinarily do to translate the English narration into Urdu.
A look into Ms Khan’s classroom
Ms Khan and the students are in the assessment phase of  that corrective lesson when 
you enter the narrative. 
‘Can someone review what the task will be for the next 20 minutes?’ Ms Khan asked 
her students. Ms Khan scanned the room and noted that approximately 70 per cent 
of  her students raised their hands. In her mind, she mentally recorded which students 
had not raised their hands to ensure she checked with them after she had given 
instructions. ‘Yes, Asiya. Remind the class of  the directions I just gave’.
‘We should look at our notes from the video we watched and write a brief  explanation 
of  rotation and revolution in our science notebooks. This will show how much we 
understand’, Asiya recalled.  
S
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
128
‘Exactly . Quietly begin your independent work’, Ms Khan instructed. The 31 students 
in Ms Khan’s classroom began to read their notes and write their explanations. Ms 
Khan walked to the groups of  students that she noted had not raised their hands to 
make sure they understood what the task was. Most of  these students had begun to 
write. She restated the instructions to Mustafa and Rafaz, who were not working, 
and watched them as they began their work. When the students were redirected, she 
saw that they were accurately summarizing the key concepts from the lesson. She 
inferred that perhaps they were not paying attention to the directions, and noted that 
in her monitoring notebook. ‘Mustafa and Rafaz, be sure to pay close attention when 
directions are given’, she clearly stated.
‘Yes, Ms Khan’, the boys replied in unison.
Ms Khan walked through the aisles of  student benches to assess what students were 
writing in order to gather data on the students’ understanding of  the lesson’s objectives. 
She wrote a quick note in her notebook that Farhad had written the exact oration of  
the video about the Earth’s axis. Ms Khan asked herself, ‘I wonder if  Farhad can explain 
this concept in his own words?’ She asked calmly , ‘Farhad, talk to me about what you 
wrote’. Farhad drew a quick image of  the Earth and explained how the Earth revolves as 
he delineated the line on the image he had drawn in his science notebook. ‘Farhad, you 
understand the definition of  the axis and its importance clearly! Work on writing your 
notes in your own words next time’. She took note of  this in her monitoring notebook 
and moved to the next group of  students. 
Here, she noticed Nafisa and Amir writing incorrect information about the difference 
between rotation and revolution. They were working together and had decided that the 
Sun revolved around the Earth. Ms Khan urgently exclaimed to herself, ‘There seems 
to be a misunderstanding here. I will need to clarify’. She bent down to have a mini-
conference with the two students and presented a clear explanation by showing them a 
diagram. She checked Nafisa’s understanding by asking her to repeat this explanation to 
Amir to make sure they understood. Ms Khan looked at her watch and noted that it was 
time to move into reading groups. As she walked to the front of  the room, she jotted 
down the key points of  the conversation she had with Nafisa and Amir.
‘Students, I need your attention. You worked very hard and wrote strong summaries of  
the lesson. Take two minutes to share your summary with your partner’. As students 
read their summaries to their classmates, Ms Khan listened to two partnerships. ‘Table 
monitors, please collect the science notebooks. I look forward to reading what you 
have written! We will now move into reading groups. Based on the oral reading and 
comprehension test you took last week with me, you were given a colour. I would 
like the purple group to come meet with me in the front of  the room. The rest of  the 
class will be given different articles to read about rotation and revolution’.1 The student 
monitors passed out the articles, and students began to read.
1 Groupings were formed based on an 
oral reading assessment that Ms Khan 
gave to students the previous week. 
Articles were chosen according to read -
ing ability. Ms Khan will instruct each 
group for 10 minutes in this period and 
work with each group on a particular 
reading strategy (for example, making 
predictions about the plot of the story 
before they start to read).
129
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Discussion questions
1) Now that you have had a chance to read the description of  Ms Khan’s 
classroom, identify the assessment activities that you notice.
2) While the students are working independently , Ms Khan interacts with 
individuals or pairs four times. Identify which of  these interactions you think 
are assessments of  learning. Distinguish between assessments of  learning and 
checks that Ms Khan makes to be sure her students understand directions. 
What is the value (if  any) in both of  these kinds of  teacher actions?
3) Think about Ms Khan’s analysis that was described in the beginning of  this 
narrative. How do you think she came to the realization that students faced 
conceptual misunderstandings? Is her reasoning clear to you? If  so, do you think 
she is right? 
4) Why does Ms Khan stop to talk with Farhad? What does she learn? What can 
she do with this information? 
5) Ms Khan takes notes in her monitoring notebook. Refer back to one of  
the notes she writes, and discuss what she might do with that information. 
How might this information inform her immediate practice and her future 
instructional decisions?
6) Think about a classroom you have seen recently . Which assessment practices 
did you notice? Which assessment practices might you add to enhance the 
quality of  instruction that students experience based on your new knowledge?   
7) Compare this example to the other examples of  formative assessment. What is 
similar? Different?
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
130
Unit 1, week 2, session 3
T eacher feedback on the solar system 
unit test (before receiving advice)
27/35 = 77%Section I: Multiple-choice questions
Please choose the best answer for the questions below .
1. Which of  the following objects does not exist in the sky? 
 a.   the Sun 
 b.   meteors
 c.   mammoths
 d.   asteroids
2. Which of  the following objects resembles the shape of  the Earth? 
 a.   an egg
 b.   an orange
 c.   a leaf
 d.   a disc
3. The movement of  the Earth around the Sun is called
 a.   rotation.  
When an object rotates, it moves around itself. 
When the Earth moves around the Sun it’s 
called a revolution.
 b.   oscillation.
 c.   revolution.
 d.   vibration.
4. The time it takes for the Earth to orbit the Sun is
 a.   a year.
 b.   a month.
 c.   a week.
 d.   a day .
S
131
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Use the following diagram to answer the question below . 
 
the North Star
the sphere of the sky around a central axis
Note: The diagram is not drawn to scale.
5. At one point, the ancient Greeks thought of  the Earth as shown in the 
diagram above (a flat disc situated in a ball of  hollow sky that moves). Which 
of  the following statements would have to be true for this model to be true? 
a.   We would be able to travel to a place on the Earth where the Earth meets the 
sky .
b.   We would be able to travel to a place on the Earth where the Sun sets.
c.   We would be able to travel to a place on the Earth where the Sun rises.
d.   All of  the above would have to be true.
e.   None of  the above would have to be true.
6. The northern hemisphere of  the Earth is 
 a.   an imaginary line around which the Earth spins.
 b.   the half  of  the planet that is north of  its equator.
 c.   the half  of  the planet that is south of  its equator.
 d.   the part of  the Earth facing the Sun.
7. Day and night happen because 
Can the Earth move near and 
far from the Sun within 24 
hours?
 a.   the Earth is spinning around its axis. 
 b.   the Sun hides in the deep sky .
 c.   someone turns off  the lights of  the universe.
 d.   the Earth goes far away from the Sun.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
132
Use the diagram below to answer the next two questions. In this diagram, ‘e’ 
represents the Earth and ‘N’ represents north.
Note: The diagram is not drawn to scale.
8. In the northern hemisphere, which season is occurring in the above diagram? 
 a.   Winter 
If the Earth’s northern hemisphere is tilted 
away from the Sun’s, energy will not be 
warming that portion.
 b.   Summer
 c.   Spring
 d.   Fall
9. Which season will occur in the northern hemisphere six months after the 
season shown in the above diagram? 
 a.   Winter
 b.   Summer 
See above feedback. c.   Spring
 d.   Fall
10. When the Moon is between the Earth and the Sun and we cannot see its 
lit-up side at all from the Earth, this phase of  the Moon is called the 
 a.   first-quarter phase.
 b.   full Moon phase.
 c.   last-quarter phase.
 d.   new Moon phase.
133
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Use the following diagram to answer the next question. In this diagram, ‘e’ represents 
the Earth; ‘S’ represents the Sun; and A, B, C, and D are different positions of  the Moon.
Note: The diagram above and the diagrams in questions 11 and 12 are not drawn to scale.
11. From Earth, which position would show the half  Moon phase? 
 
 a.   Position A 
 b.   Position B
 c.   Position C
 d.   Position D
12. From Earth, which position would show the full Moon phase? 
 
 a.   Position A 
 b.   Position B
 c.   Position C
 d.   Position D
13. If  a complete Moon cycle takes approximately 28 days, about how many days 
during a month could you expect to see a crescent Moon? 
 
 a.   1
 b.   2
 c.   7
 d.   13
14. Imagine you are an astronaut and your mission is to pull out the Earth’s axis. 
Which one of  the following is true about your mission? 
 a.   Because the axis of  the Earth is an imaginary line, you cannot physically  
  pull it out.
 b.   If  you put a very strong magnet in space next to the Earth, it will be able  
  to pull out the axis.
 c.   The axis of  the Earth is too large and heavy to be pulled out of  the Earth.
 d.   The axis of  the Earth is too delicate and will break into pieces before it   
  can be pulled out.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
134
15. If  you saw a full Moon last night, which phase of  the Moon would you see in 
a week? 
 a.   First-quarter Moon
 b.   Third-quarter Moon
 c.   Waxing crescent Moon
 d.   New Moon
Section II: True-false questions
 Use the following diagram to answer the next question. 
Sun
Earth
Moon
Note: The diagram is not drawn to scale.
16. The diagram above represents the correct positions of  the Sun, Moon, and 
the Earth in the solar system. 
 a.   True
 b.   False
17. The solar system is composed of  eight planets, and the Sun is in the centre. 
 a.   True 
 b.   False
18. Viewed from the Earth with the human eye, planets look very small because 
they are so far away . 
 a.   True 
 b.   False 
135
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
19. Winter and summer are determined by the Earth’s distance from the Sun. 
 a.   True 
The Earth’s tilt, not distance, determines seasons. 
Refer to diagram for questions 8 and 9. b.   False
20. Earth’s seasonal temperature changes—cold in the winter, hot in the summer, 
and mild in the spring and fall—are the result of  the tilt of  the Earth’s axis as 
it spins around the Sun. 
 a.   True See above feedback
 b.   False
21. According to the following diagram of  the Earth and the Sun, the location 
indicated by the white heart (on Earth) is experiencing day . 
 a.   True
 b.   False
Note: The diagram is not drawn to scale.
Section III: Sentence-completion questions
Please fill in the missing blanks for the questions below .
22. The Sun’s diameter is    100     times that of  the Earth’s diameter. 
23. The Earth is     100    Sun diameters away from the Sun. 
24. The Moon’s diameter is   1/4   the size of  the Earth’s diameter.  
25. The Sun’s diameter is   400   times that of  the Moon’s diameter. 
26. When the Earth spins around itself, this movement is called revolution. 
27. One complete revolution of  the Moon around the Earth is called lunar cycle.
it seems you are having 
trouble distinguishing between 
rotation and revolution.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
136
Section IV: Matching questions
Match the terms in the following questions with the correct choices.
28. Match the following movements of  the Sun, Earth, and the Moon with the 
phenomena they cause. 
One week (7 days)
a.   Earth’s movement around itself
One day (24 hours)
b.   Moon’s movement around the Earth
One year (365 days)
c.   Earth’s movement around the Sun
Approximately one month (28 days)
29. Your teacher has asked you to pick objects to represent a scale model of  the 
Sun, Earth, and the Moon. Match the name of  the object you would use to 
represent the Sun, Earth, and the Moon. Put the correct letter in front of  the 
Sun, Earth, and Moon. (A)
a.   A ball (1 metre in diameter)
The Sun
b.   A ball (1 centimetre in diameter)
The Moon
c.   A marble (3 centimetres in diameter)
The Earth
d.   A tiny bead (3 millimetres in diameter)
Section V: Short-answer questions
Provide answers for the questions below in one or two sentences.
30. T he planet Mars is bigger than the Moon, but the Moon seems much bigger  
 in the night sky . Why? 
 The Moon appears to be bigger than Mars because the   
 distance between the Earth and Mars is much greater than   
 the distance between the Earth and the Moon.
31. Ho w far is the Moon from the Earth?
 The Moon is 30 Earths away from the Earth.
32. Using the answer from question 31, draw a scale model of  the Sun, Earth, and 
the Moon. (Hint: Use appropriate distance and size.)
Moon Earth Sun
33. Name an e xample of  a scale model from your everyday life and explain in 
one line why it is a scale model. Note: First part of  the question is application and 
second part is comprehension.
 A map shows the things that are on the Earth and that is   
 why it is a scale model.
You show understanding of this 
relationship model in previous 
answers, but have trouble 
representing it. Look at question 
29 to rethink this.
137
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
34. Do all places on Earth experience day and night at the same time? Why or 
why not?
 No. They are in different places, so they do not face the   
 Sun at the same time.
35. Describe in one or two sentences the major difference between rotation and 
revolution.
 Rotation is when the Earth moves around the Sun.    
 Revolution is when the Earth moves around itself.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
138
Unit 1, week 2, session 3
T eacher feedback on the solar system 
unit test (after receiving advice)
Section I: Multiple-choice questions
Please choose the best answer for the questions below .
1. Which of  the following objects does not exist in the sky? 
 a.   the Sun 
 b.   meteors
 c.   mammoths
 d.   asteroids
2. Which of  the following objects resembles the shape of  the Earth? 
 a.   an egg
 b.   an orange
 c.   a leaf
 d.   a disc
3. The movement of  the Earth around the Sun is called
 a.   rotation.  Refer to your notes from lesson four. 
The movement around the Sun is a big 
movement, whereas rotation is a smaller 
movement.
 b.   oscillation.
 c.   revolution.
 d.   vibration.
4. The time it takes for the Earth to orbit the Sun is
 a.   a year.
 b.   a month.
 c.   a week.
 d.   a day .
S
139
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Use the following diagram to answer the question below . 
 
the North Star
the sphere of the sky around a central axis
Note: The diagram is not drawn to scale.
5. At one point, the ancient Greeks thought of  the Earth as shown in the 
diagram above (a flat disc situated in a ball of  hollow sky that moves). Which 
of  the following statements would have to be true for this model to be true? 
a.   We would be able to travel to a place on the Earth where the Earth meets the 
sky .
b.   We would be able to travel to a place on the Earth where the Sun sets.
c.   We would be able to travel to a place on the Earth where the Sun rises.
d.   All of  the above would have to be true.
e.   None of  the above would have to be true.
6. The northern hemisphere of  the Earth is 
 a.   an imaginary line around which the Earth spins.
 b.   the half  of  the planet that is north of  its equator.
 c.   the half  of  the planet that is south of  its equator.
 d.   the part of  the Earth facing the Sun.
7. Day and night happen because 
 a.   the Earth is spinning around its axis. 
 b.   the Sun hides in the deep sky .
 c.   someone turns off  the lights of  the universe.
 d.   the Earth goes far away from the Sun.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
140
Use the diagram below to answer the next two questions. In this diagram, ‘e’ 
represents the Earth and ‘N’ represents north.
Note: The diagram is not drawn to scale.
8. In the northern hemisphere, which season is occurring in the above diagram? 
 a.   Winter 
 b.   Summer
 c.   Spring
 d.   Fall
9. Which season will occur in the northern hemisphere six months after the 
season shown in the above diagram? 
 a.   Winter
 b.   Summer 
 c.   Spring
 d.   Fall
10. When the Moon is between the Earth and the Sun and we cannot see its 
lit-up side at all from the Earth, this phase of  the Moon is called the 
 a.   first-quarter phase.
 b.   full Moon phase.
 c.   last-quarter phase.
 d.   new Moon phase.
* We will think about questions 7, 8, 9, 26, and 35 together because the mistakes are 
related. Take a look at the diagram on this page. When the Earth moves around its axis, 
part of the Earth faces the Sun and part faces away. What time of day will it be on 
the hemisphere that faces the Sun and receives direct light? Think about this question to 
help you revise #7. Refer back to your notes for lesson 4 when we watched the video and 
rework your responses in the margins. We will talk together about the differences between 
rotation and revolution and what phenomena these movements create.
141
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Use the following diagram to answer the next question. In this diagram, ‘e’ represents 
the Earth; ‘S’ represents the Sun; and A, B, C, and D are different positions of  the Moon.
Note: The diagram above and the diagrams in questions 11 and 12 are not drawn to scale.
11. From Earth, which position would show the half  Moon phase? 
 
 a.   Position A 
 b.   Position B
 c.   Position C
 d.   Position D
12. From Earth, which position would show the full Moon phase? 
 
 a.   Position A 
 b.   Position B
 c.   Position C
 d.   Position D
13. If  a complete Moon cycle takes approximately 28 days, about how many days 
during a month could you expect to see a crescent Moon? 
 
 a.   1 
 b.   2
 c.   7
 d.   13
14. Imagine you are an astronaut and your mission is to pull out the Earth’s axis. 
Which one of  the following is true about your mission? 
 a.   Because the axis of  the Earth is an imaginary line, you cannot physically  
  pull it out.
 b.   If  you put a very strong magnet in space next to the Earth, it will be able  
  to pull out the axis.
 c.   The axis of  the Earth is too large and heavy to be pulled out of  the Earth.
 d.   The axis of  the Earth is too delicate and will break into pieces before it   
  can be pulled out.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
142
15. If  you saw a full Moon last night, which phase of  the Moon would you see in 
a week? 
 a.   First-quarter Moon
 b.   Third-quarter Moon
 c.   Waxing crescent Moon
 d.   New Moon
Section II: True-false questions
 Use the following diagram to answer the next question. 
Sun
Earth
Moon
Note: The diagram is not drawn to scale.
16. The diagram above represents the correct positions of  the Sun, Moon, and 
the Earth in the solar system. 
 a.   True
 b.   False
17. The solar system is composed of  eight planets, and the Sun is in the centre. 
 a.   True 
 b.   False
18. Viewed from the Earth with the human eye, planets look very small because 
they are so far away . 
 a.   True 
 b.   False 
* It takes approximately 
28 days for the Moon to 
complete a lunar cycle. 
If the new Moon just 
occurred, and the waxing 
crescent occurs at the 
very beginning of the 
cycle after the new Moon. 
what phase would the 
Moon be in? Refer to your 
notes and diagrams from 
lessons 7 and 8. Create a 
diagram to help you think 
through this answer. Write 
the correct response in the 
margin and explain your 
thinking.
143
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
19. Winter and summer are determined by the Earth’s distance from the Sun. 
 a.   True 
 b.   False
20. Earth’s seasonal temperature changes—cold in the winter, hot in the summer, 
and mild in the spring and fall—are the result of  the tilt of  the Earth’s axis as 
it spins around the Sun. 
 a.   True 
 b.   False
21. According to the following diagram of  the Earth and the Sun, the location 
indicated by the white heart (on Earth) is experiencing day . 
 a.   True
 b.   False
Note: The diagram is not drawn to scale.
Section III: Sentence-completion questions
Please fill in the missing blanks for the questions below
22. The Sun’s diameter is    100    times that of  the Earth’s diameter. 
23. The Earth is    100   Sun diameters away from the Sun. 
24. The Moon’s diameter is   1/4    the size of  the Earth’s diameter.  
25. The Sun’s diameter is   400  times that of  the Moon’s diameter. 
26. When the Earth spins around itself, this movement is called revolution. 
27. One complete revolution of  the Moon around the Earth is called lunar cycle.
* We will consider         
 your answers to 
questions 19 and 20  
 together because 
they are related to 
the same content 
misunderstanding.   
Refer back to your   
 notes from lesson 6 
where we learned 
about how seasonal 
changes are related to 
the tilt in the Earth’s 
axis. Review your 
notes from the video.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
144
Section IV: Matching questions
Match the terms in the following questions with the correct choices.
28. Match the following movements of  the Sun, Earth, and the Moon with the 
phenomena they cause. 
One week (7 days)
a.   Earth’s movement around itself
One day (24 hours)
b.   Moon’s movement around the Earth
One year (365 days)
c.   Earth’s movement around the Sun
Approximately one month (28 days)
29. Your teacher has asked you to pick objects to represent a scale model of  the 
Sun, Earth, and the Moon. Match the name of  the object you would use to 
represent the Sun, Earth and the Moon. Put the correct letter in front of  the 
Sun, Earth, and Moon. 
a.   A ball (1 metre in diameter)
The Sun
b.   A ball (1 centimetre in diameter)
The Moon
c.   A marble (3 centimetres in diameter)
The Earth
d.   A tiny bead (3 millimetres in diameter)
Section V: Short-answer questions
Provide answers for the questions below in one or two sentences.
30. T he planet Mars is bigger than the Moon, but the Moon seems much bigger  
 in the night sky . Why? 
 The Moon appears to be bigger than Mars because the   
 distance between the Earth and Mars is much greater than   
 the distance between the Earth and the Moon.
31. Ho w far is the Moon from the Earth? 
 The Moon is 30 Earths away from the Earth.
32. Using the answer from question 31, draw a scale model of  the Sun, Earth, and 
the Moon. (Hint: Use appropriate distance and size.) 
Moon Earth Sun
33. Name an e xample of  a scale model from your everyday life and explain in one 
line why it is a scale model. 
 A map shows the things that are on the Earth and that is   
 why it is a scale model.
*You show understanding of this relationship 
model in previous answers but have trouble 
drawing it. Look at question 29 to rethink this.
*Can you tell me why it is a 
scale model? 
Think of the meaning of scale model.
-1/2
145
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
34. Do all places on Earth experience day and night at the same time? Why or 
why not?
 No. They are in different places, so they do not face the   
 Sun at the same time.
35. Describe in one or two sentences the major difference between rotation and 
revolution.
 Rotation is when the Earth moves around the Sun.    
 Revolution is when the Earth moves around itself.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
146
Unit 1, week 2, session 3
Memo to teacher about feedback on the 
solar system unit test
To the Classroom Teacher,
Thank you for giving me a copy of  the feedback that you wrote on the solar system test. 
I am happy to have the opportunity to make some comments about your feedback.
Use the bottom of  page three and tell the student that you are going to help her find the 
correct answers to questions 6, 7, 8, and 20. Direct her attention to the diagrams and 
prompt her to think about the position of  the Earth in relation to the Sun using those 
diagrams. A series of  questions about what she sees can lead to correct answers. She should 
take the lead in finding the information she needs in the notebook to correct her errors.
There is another mistake, on question 15. Again, I would direct her to her science 
notebook (to the notes for lesson 7) and tell her to look for her drawings and notes 
about phases of  the Moon. Let her take it from there. When she finds it, she should 
write the correct answer in the margin next to the question.
Your feedback on question 32 is just right. This child is in the fifth grade though, so I 
would use the word drawing rather than representing.
Your feedback to question 28 is important to reconsider. Read it again. Yes, she is 
having trouble distinguishing between the two concepts. But it doesn’t help to tell her 
that if  you don’t suggest a way to find the correct answer. She needs to be led to think 
about the distinction between rotation and revolution herself  rather than being told 
the distinction. (See also question 35.) Go back to lesson 6 and see if  there is a place in 
the lesson where she was instructed to write notes that might help her if  she looked in 
her science notebook. 
She may know the difference between rotation and revolution but may not remember 
which word goes with which movement. If  that’s the case, advise her to use a 
mnemonic, i.e. the smaller movement goes with the shorter word.
In summary , I think it is a very good idea to group all questions that reflect the same 
error together for the purpose of  providing feedback. You need to be very clear about 
what you are doing, though (i.e. write to the student, ‘The mistakes in questions 6, 7, 
8, and 20 are related, so we are going to think about them together’).
Pointing out a problem is only useful if  it is accompanied by suggestions on finding 
solutions. Feedback is questioning and probing rather than telling.
Sincerely ,
Professional Development Coordinator
S
147
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 1, week 3, session 2
List of contrasts between a test-based 
culture and an assessment-based 
culture in schools
People who favour a test-based culture 
in schools...
People who favour an assess-
ment-based culture in schools...
Place more importance on numerical 
data than on anecdotal data 
Believe that the measurement of  human 
traits and behaviour can be reduced  
to numbers
Believe in the value of  extrinsic rewards 
for learning and academic achievement
Maintain trust in grades as praise 
or criticism as effective feedback to 
students
Maintain separation between instruction 
and testing/assessment
Believe in the value of  competition 
between students in school 
Believe that learning proceeds in increments 
and trust the idea of  ‘readiness’ for the next 
increment in instruction
Believe that human traits and behaviours 
are too complex to be measured by one tool
Argue that learning and achievement 
in school must be studied from differ-
ent perspectives using more than one 
assessment tool
Believe that intrinsic motivation is more 
likely than external rewards to lead to 
sustained effort to learn in school
De-value grades and praise in favour of  
messages, oral and written, that encour-
age students to think and learn from 
their mistakes
Attempt to integrate assessment and 
instruction
Value co-operation over competition 
between students in school
Encourage students to take risks with 
challenging tasks and new ideas
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
148
List of contrasts between a test-based culture and an 
assessment-based culture in schools, continued
People who favour a test-based culture 
in schools...
People who favour an assessment- 
based culture in schools...
Prefer to measure the products of  learning 
rather than the process of  learning
Value adult authority in the classroom
Are not troubled by long intervals 
between tests
Assess instruction by drawing inferences 
from measures of  learning
Assess the way a student works through 
a task as well as the product of  that work
Enable students to share responsibility with 
the teacher for learning and assessment
Believe that assessment needs to be 
continuous to have a positive effect on 
learning and achievement
Assess instruction by experimenting with 
instruction’s effects on learning
This is not an exhaustive list. There is plenty of  room for other ideas!
149
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 2, week 4, session 1:
Sun, Earth, and the Moon unit: Student 
T eachers’ copy
Description of the unit 
The ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’ unit is a mini-science unit for grade 4 or 5. This unit 
uses interactive and participatory teaching methods to teach students about the Sun, 
Earth, and Moon system. Each lesson in this unit is designed to be 1–1.5 hours long. 
This document is prepared for Student Teachers. The learning objectives, learning 
targets, success criteria, and formative assessments from lessons 2, 3, 5, and 6 have 
been omitted from the Student Teachers’ copy of  this unit. 
This is because Student Teachers will create learning objectives, learning targets, 
success criteria, and formative assessments (pertaining only to success criteria) for 
lessons 2, 3, 5, and 6. Student Teachers will either add the formative assessment 
activities or find ones that are already built into the lessons. 
Learning goal for the unit
Students will understand the interactions between the Sun, Earth, and the Moon and 
how these interactions affect life on Earth. 
Lesson 1: Objects in the sky
Learning objectives
Students will:
•	 understand that the universe is vast and has millions of  different types of  
objects, including our solar system
•	 understand that the Sun is the centre of  our solar system, which has eight planets
•	 recognize the position of  the Sun, Earth, and its Moon in the solar system
•	 know that all the planets revolve around the Sun in a circular path
•	 know the meaning of  orbit and that paths of  the planets around the Sun are 
called orbits.
Learning targets
Students will:
•	 understand that the Sun is the centre of  our solar system, which has eight planets
•	 recognize the position of  the Sun, Earth, and its Moon in the solar system
•	 know that all the planets revolve around the Sun in a circular path called an orbit.
S
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
150
Success criteria
Students will:
•	 write the names of  all eight planets in correct order
•	 draw a labelled diagram of  the Sun, Earth, and the Moon to show their   
 correct positions
•	 draw and label the paths of  the Earth and Moon. 
Vocabulary
solar system, planets, Sun, orbit, Moon, star
Advanced preparation
Assign the students the following homework the day before this lesson:
•	 Spend 10 minutes observing the sky at night and write and draw the objects  
 in the sky .
•	 Write about your experiences and reactions while viewing the sky .
Materials required
•	 Chart paper 
•	 Internet connection 
•	 Video projector
Introduction (connections to prior knowledge)
Initiate a discussion to find out what students already know about the solar system, 
Earth, Sun, and the Moon. Ask students the following questions to conduct a class 
discussion:
•	 What do you know about the Sun?
•	 What do you know about the Earth?
•	 What do you know about the Moon?
•	 How are the Sun, Earth, and the Moon related?
Note student replies on a piece of  chart paper so they can be used later in this lesson 
or the unit.
Exploration 1
Take students to the play yard and ask them to observe the sky and note the objects 
they see. The students should write and/or draw these objects. Encourage the 
students to draw any observations or conclusions about the size and number of  
objects or any other observations about the sky in general.  
Ask the students to make a comprehensive list of  images from the day and night skies. 
Ask the students to note down the objects that they think exist in the sky but might 
not have been visible to them during the day and night observations.
151
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Share
Bring all the students back to the classroom and give them a chance to share 
their observations.
Note students’ observations on a chart paper.
Initiate a class discussion about the students’ experiences during their sky observa-
tions. Use the following guiding questions and write the students’ responses on  
the blackboard.
Guiding questions
•	 What are the different types of  objects you saw in the sky?
•	 Were all the objects in the sky visible to us? Might there be other objects in the 
sky? Name them.
•	 What do you know about the Sun? 
•	 Ask the students to write down at least three things they know about the solar 
system.
Take a few student volunteers and ask them to share their responses with the rest of  
the class. Write these responses on the blackboard. 
Exploration 2
In this activity , students will act like young astronauts and take a trip to the solar 
system through a short video.
During the video, students should write down and/or draw at least five interesting 
things about the solar system.
Show the following video, ‘Solar System Animation for Kids’, to the class. The video is 
7 minutes and 41 seconds long: 
 Ø http://www .youtube.com/watch?v=sJrDiUG2JAo
Notes 
This video features the following concepts:
•	 Even things big in size will look smaller from a distance. This gives the children 
an idea that the stars and planets look small from the Earth because they are 
really far away .
•	 It showcases the solar system and its planets and gives the order of  the planets.
•	 It goes over the sizes of  different planets and their few distinguishing features.
Share
Tell the students, ‘Now that our space trip is over, let us share what we observed 
during our journey to space’. Take responses from as many students as time allows 
and note them on the blackboard. 
Ask the students to write these responses in their science notebooks.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
152
Guiding questions
Initiate a class discussion to give students a chance to share their observations with the 
whole class. Use the following guiding questions to conduct the classroom discussion 
and note students’ responses on the blackboard. Ask the students to write their 
classmates’ observations in their science notebooks. 
•	 Describe the solar system in your own words.
•	 Why do objects in space seem so small?
•	 What is the position of  our Earth and Moon in the solar system? Is the Moon  
 also a planet?
•	 Is the Moon smaller, bigger, or the same size as the Sun? Why?
•	 Are planets stationary or in motion? Can anyone describe their motion?
•	 What are the paths of  the planets called? Where does that name come from?
Ask students to note these observations in their notebooks if  they have missed them 
during the video.
Refer to the chart paper from the introduction activity and Exploration 1 and explore 
with the students how and why their responses have changed or not changed after 
their virtual tour to the solar system.
Culminating activity
Formative assessment: Ask the students to write down the names of  the eight 
planets in correct order.
Formative assessment: Ask the students to also draw a labelled diagram of  the Sun, 
Earth, and the Moon in their correct positions. Also draw and label the paths of  the 
Earth and the Moon.
NOTE: At this point, students can use their judgement to capture the sizes in this diagram. 
Go over the formative assessment answers with the students.
Ask a few students to share their answers with the class. Make corrections if  needed. 
Ask all the students to check their answers and make any corrections if  needed. 
Tell students that they will further explore the relative sizes of  the Sun, Moon, and the 
Earth in the next lesson. 
153
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Lesson 2: How big, how far
Learning objectives
Learning targets
Success criteria
Vocabulary
scale model, diameter, ruler
Materials required
•	 A blown-up balloon (one metre in diameter) 
•	 Several balls of  different sizes (1 centimetre, 5 centimetres, 10 centimetres) 
•	 A football
•	 A few coriander seeds or peppercorns (two to three millimetres)
Introduction (connections to prior knowledge)
Students will look at how big the Sun, Earth, and the Moon are when compared to 
one another and how far they are located from one another. Students should look at 
their observations and drawings from the previous lesson.
Guiding questions
Use the following guiding questions to continue the discussion on the Sun, Moon, and 
the Earth. 
•	 Which one is the biggest object among the Sun, Earth, and the Moon?
•	 Why do the Sun and the Moon look about the same size?
¡¡ Bring up the tree analogy from the video from the previous lesson to remind  
 students of  the relationship between distance and size appearance.
¡¡ Large things look smaller in size when viewed from a distance.
Students will use different objects to understand how big or small the Sun, Earth, and the 
Moon are as compared to one another. The students will also look at the relative distances 
of  the Sun, Earth, and the Moon to get an idea of  how far they are from one another.
Exploration 1
In this activity , students will investigate the sizes of  the Sun, Earth, and the Moon by 
using scale models.
Check the students’ understanding of  a scale model by asking, ‘What is a scale 
model?’ Students should write down their predictions of  what a scale model is in 
their science notebooks.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
154
Take responses from a few students. Then tell them that when we reduce the size of  all 
parts of  an object by the same proportion, it is called a scale model of  the object. A globe 
is an example of  a scale model of  the Earth because the sizes of  all the large bodies of  
Earth (the continents and oceans) have been reduced by the same proportion.
Ask the students to give at least three examples of  scale models and write them in 
their notebooks.
Divide the class into groups of  three or four students and provide them objects of  
different sizes. Each group should get a balloon and three balls of  different sizes (1 
centimetre, 5 centimetres, 10 centimetres), a football, and a few coriander seeds.
Show the students the blown-up balloon and ask, ‘If  we assume that the Sun is as big 
as this balloon, how big do you think the Earth and the Moon are?’  
Take a ruler and put it across the diameter of  the balloon to make sure that the 
students understand the concept of  diameter. Tell the students that the balloon is one 
metre across, which means it is one metre in diameter.
NOTE: The teacher should blow the balloon to one metre diameter. Before demonstrating 
the diameter with the ruler, draw a diagram on the blackboard to explain diameter to the 
students Use the diagram below as a guide. The line drawn across the widest part of the 
balloon should measure one metre.
Ask the students to pick two items to represent the Earth and the Moon.
Give each group a chance to share their assumptions with the class.
Tell the students that the Sun’s diameter is about 100 times greater than the Earth’s 
diameter, which means we will need 100 Earths to stretch across the Sun.
Give the students some time to come up with ideas to calculate the diameter of  the Earth.
Help each group come to the conclusion that they should use a one-centimetre ball 
to represent the Earth because the Earth’s diameter is a 100 times smaller than the 
Sun’s diameter. 
Ask the students to make predictions about which object they could place 100 times 
across the surface of  the balloon.
155
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Ask students if  they want to change the object they chose earlier to represent the 
Earth (based on the new information they now have) and give them a few moments 
to correct their model of  the Earth.
Tell the students that the Moon’s diameter is one-fourth the diameter of  the Earth, 
and ask them to find the diameter of  the Moon based on this information. 
Go around the class to help groups calculate the diameter of  the Moon and make sure 
that they calculate it correctly as two millimetres to three millimetres. 
Ask the students if  they need to change their model of  the Moon based on this new 
information and give them a few moments to do that.
Ask the students to note their observations and reactions after finding out about the 
size differences between the Sun, Earth, and the Moon and encourage them to write 
as well as draw their observations and reactions.
NOTE: Students should always use their science notebooks for their science class work 
and homework.
Share
Ask a student from each group to share their observations and reactions with the class.
Ask the students, ‘Keeping our model of  the Sun, Earth, and the Moon in mind, can 
anyone tell me how much smaller the Moon is as compared to the Earth?’
Take a few student responses from the class and write them on the board or chart paper.
Discuss this question with the students and make any corrections if  required.
Ask the students to note their classmates’ responses down in their science notebooks.
Exploration 2 
In this activity , students will investigate relative distances between the Sun, Earth, and 
the Moon.
Before starting the activity , ask the students to make predictions about the distances 
between the Sun, Earth, and the Moon. Ask the students the following question to 
guide their predictions: ‘In your opinion, is the Sun closer to the Earth or the Moon? 
Why do you think that?’
Remind the students of  the video they watched in lesson 1 and their notes from the 
video about why the Sun and the Moon look as if  they were the same size, even 
though they now know that the Sun is about 400 times bigger than the Moon.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
156
The students should be able to make the connections between lessons 1 and 2 that the 
farther an object is, the smaller it looks. The Sun’s farther distance from the Earth as 
compared to the Moon makes the Sun appear to be the same size as the Moon.
Ask each group to pick members to represent the Sun, Earth, and the Moon.
Tell the students to estimate how far the Earth and the Moon are from the Sun and 
stand accordingly while holding the objects representing the Sun, Earth, and the Moon. 
For example, the student representing the Sun should hold the balloon in their  hands, 
the student representing the Earth should hold a one-centimetre ball in their hands, and 
the student representing the Moon should hold a small coriander seed in their hands. 
Go around the classroom to check the distance representation of  all the groups.
Ask for a volunteer from each group to interpret their representation.
Provide the students with the following information to check the accuracy of  their 
representation of  distances between the Sun, Earth, and the Moon.
•	 The Earth is about 100 Sun diameters away from the Sun, so if  our Sun is one 
metre, how far would it be from the Earth? 
¡¡ Give the students time to calculate the distance.
¡¡ The Earth would be 100 metres away from a one-metre-diameter Sun. 
•	 Tell the students that the Moon is about 30 Earth diameters away from the 
Earth and give them some time to calculate the distance between the Earth and 
the Moon.
¡¡ The Moon would be 30 centimetres away from a one-centimetre-diameter Earth.
Help students realize that the Moon is a lot closer to the Earth as compared to the Sun.
Take the students to a nearby playground and ask them to stand in position (according 
to the distances they calculated) to represent the Sun, Earth, and the Moon.
Ask the students to write down their observations and reactions in their notebooks.
Reference: Education Development Center, Kendall/Hunt Publishing, National 
Science Foundation, ‘Sun, Earth and Moon’. Insights: An Elementary Hands-on Inquiry 
Science Curriculum, Teacher guide, 2nd ed. (Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt, 2007), 
195–197.
Share
Ask at least one person from each group to share their observations and reactions 
after looking at how far the Sun, Earth, and the Moon are from each other.
Ask the students to make predictions about the travel time between the Moon and the Earth.
157
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Take responses from a few students and write them down on the board. Share with 
the students that it takes an astronaut about three days to travel between the Earth 
and the Moon even in a rocket going as fast as 6 kilometres per second. 
Ask the students, ‘Now that you know how long it takes to go to the Moon, can 
anyone predict how long it will take to travel to the Sun on the same rocket?’
Share with the students that it will take several months to reach the Sun, but the Sun 
is so hot that we cannot even get close to it.
Reference: Joan Board, Stargazing Live: Lesson Plans (BBC Learning, 2012), 6–7. 
Retrieved 19 April, 2012. 
 Ø http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/tv/guides/BBC_Stargazing_Live_2012_Lesson_  
 plans_KS2.pdf
Culminating activity
Ask the students to write and/or draw three new things they learned in this lesson.
Go over the formative assessments to give students a chance to correct their answers.
Tell the students to read chapter 10, pages 89–90, from their science textbook.
Lesson 3: Endless Earth
Learning objectives
Learning targets
Success criteria
Vocabulary
sphere, satellite, Earth
Materials required
•	 Printouts of  the story ‘How Did We Find Out that the Earth Is Round?’ by   
 Isaac Asimov (one per student)
•	 Printouts of  satellite pictures of  the Earth 
Introduction (connections to prior knowledge)
Initiate a discussion to find out what students know about the shape of  the Earth. 
Probe students to talk about their idea of  the shape of  the Earth and how they came 
to their conclusions.
Ask the students, ‘Imagine that you are in space looking directly at our Earth. What 
do you think the Earth will look like?’ Ask them to make predictions and draw this 
view of  the Earth from space.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
158
After giving students a few minutes to draw , share with the students that people’s 
ideas about the Earth’s shape have changed over the years and the next activity will 
explore this topic in detail.
Exploration 1
In this activity , students will discuss how people in the past found out that the Earth is 
a sphere.
Check students’ knowledge of  the definition of  sphere. If  the students are not aware of  the 
meaning of  sphere, show them a few spherical shapes such as a cricket ball, tennis ball, or 
an orange to make sure the students understand what a spherical shape looks like. 
After showing them a few spherical shapes, ask the students to come up with at least 
two examples of  a sphere and write and/or draw them in their notebooks. Ask a few 
students to share their examples with the class and note them on the board. 
Use the story ‘How Did We Find Out that the Earth Is Round?’ by Isaac Asimov 
(pages 1 to 10). It can be retrieved at:
 Ø http://www .arvindguptatoys.com/arvindgupta/earthpix.pdf
Tell the students that while reading the book, they should keep the following 
questions in mind:
•	 What were people’s very first ideas about the shape of  the Earth?
•	 Why were those ideas disregarded?
•	 What evidence did people find that supported the idea that the Earth had a   
 spherical shape?
Read the first few pages with the students and point out the important elements in the 
text. This exercise will teach students how to pay attention to crucial details. Ask the 
students to finish reading the rest of  the book on their own.
Ask the students to work in groups of  two or three and answer the questions (listed at 
the beginning of  this activity) by reading until the end of  page 10 (the end of  section 
3, ‘The Disappearing Ships’). 
Ask the students to note the evidence (answers to questions presented at the top of  
this activity) and their ideas in their science notebooks.
Share
After the students are finished reading and recording their ideas, ask one student from 
each group to share his or her ideas with the rest of  the class. Write down these ideas 
on the board.
Ask groups to write down anything they might have missed while making their observations.
159
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Exploration 2
Mention to the students that people came to the conclusion that the Earth is a sphere 
(using the evidence discussed previously). At that time, people did not have modern 
equipment such as satellites to visit space and directly observe the shape of  the Earth. 
Ask the students: ‘What do you know about satellites?’ Note a few students’ responses 
on the board. 
Use student responses to construct a definition of  satellite and ask the students to 
write it down.
A satellite is a smaller object orbiting around a larger object. Scientists use electronic 
satellites to observe objects in space. 
Ask the students, ‘Can anyone give me an example of  a natural satellite that revolves 
around the Earth?’ (The Moon is a satellite that revolves around the Earth.)
Divide the students into groups of  two or three and provide each group with satellite 
pictures of  the Earth. The pictures can be printed from the following sites:
 Ø http://visibleearth.nasa.gov/view_cat.php?categoryID=1484
 Ø http://www .earth-images.com/index3.htm
 Ø http://jtintle.wordpress.com/2005/12/07/europe-at-night/
Share
Conduct a class discussion using the following question. Write students’ responses on 
the board.
After looking at the pictures, ask the students, ‘Why does the Earth seem flat in 
these pictures?’
Take a few responses from the students, and incorporating these responses as much 
as possible, tell the students that because we are viewing the Earth on a flat computer 
screen or a flat sheet of  paper, the Earth looks flat. That is why many satellite pictures 
of  the Earth from different angles are required to confirm that Earth is a sphere and 
not a flat disc.
Putting it all together
Now students will put all the evidence together that points to the fact that Earth is a 
sphere. Draw the following table on the blackboard and ask the students to look at 
their observations from Exploration 1 and Exploration 2.
Ask the students to make a similar table in their science notebooks.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
160
Tell the students that the table will help them organize their data in a concise manner.
Observations Fact
Ship sailing away and disappearing graduallyEarth is a sphere
Satellite pictures
NOTE: Only a few observations are listed here as an example. The table needs to be 
completed using the observations from Explorations 1 and 2. The number of rows in the 
table is not representative of the number of observations. 
Culminating activity
Ask the students to draw and/or write about three new things they learned in this lesson.
The students should note down at least one fact they learned from the textbook 
reading assigned to them as homework and describe if  that fact was clarified or not at 
the end of  this lesson. 
Go over the formative assessment responses with the students. Ask a few students to 
volunteer their responses and make any corrections if  needed. Ask the whole class to 
check their formative assessment responses against the correct responses and make 
any corrections if  needed. 
Collect students’ science notebooks to check their responses to formative assessment 
activities and to note if  all the students are self-checking their answers and making 
appropriate corrections. 
In the next lesson they will learn about how the Earth moves. Ask the students to 
read chapter 10, sections 10.2 and 10.4, on pages 90 and 91 from the grade 4 science 
textbook to prepare.
Lesson 4: Movements of the Earth
Learning objectives
Students will:
•	 understand that the Earth moves around itself  and around the Sun
•	 be able to define the rotation and revolution of  the Earth
•	 be able to differentiate between the concepts of  rotation and revolution 
•	 understand that the Earth spins around itself  (on its axis)
•	 understand that the Earth’s axis is an imaginary line drawn through the Earth’s 
centre to represent its tilt and movement
•	 know the time it takes the Earth to complete a rotation and a revolution.
161
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Learning targets
Students will:
•	 understand that the Earth moves around itself  and around the Sun
•	 be able to define the rotation and revolution of  the Earth
•	 understand that the Earth’s axis is an imaginary line drawn through the Earth’s  
 centre to represent its tilt and movement.
Success criteria
Students will:
•	 draw the diagram of  the Sun and the Earth with arrows indicating the   
 movements of  the Earth
•	 define the Earth’s axis in their own words and label it in the same diagram 
•	 write one example of  rotation and one of  revolution from their daily lives and describe 
why she or he thinks these movements are examples of  rotation and revolution.
Vocabulary
rotation, revolution, axis
Advanced preparation
Print copies of  pictures of  the Earth’s axis (provided in this lesson plan).
Materials required
•	 Internet connection
•	 Video projector
•	 Computer
•	 Printed pictures of  the Earth’s axis 
•	 Chart paper 
•	 Markers
Introduction (connections to prior knowledge)
Initiate a discussion to find out what students already know about the movements of  the 
Earth. Ask the students to make predictions about the following guiding questions.
Guiding questions
•	 Do you think the Earth moves?
•	 How does it move?
¡¡ The Earth spins around itself  and moves around the Sun at the same time.
•	 When the Earth spins, what is that movement called? 
•	 When the Earth moves around the Sun, what is that movement called?
Note student replies on a large piece of  chart paper and refer to this later in this lesson 
or the unit. If  no one has provided correct responses to the questions, do not provide 
the students with the correct answers at this point.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
162
Exploration 1
During this activity , students will understand the movement patterns of  the Earth.
Show the students a video on movements of  the Earth, ‘Rotation and Revolution of  
the Earth’, and ask them to note their observations. The video can be found at: 
 Ø http://www .youtube.com/watch?v=eV4nk9or9SE&feature=fvst
NOTE: Only shows the first 2 minutes and 47 seconds of the video.
Tell the students to keep the following questions in mind when making their observations:
•	 Does the Earth spin around itself ? What is that movement called?
•	 Does the Earth spin around the Sun? What is that movement called? 
•	 Does it take longer for the Earth to spin around itself  or to go around the Sun?
•	 What are at least two interesting facts about the Earth that you learned from   
 this video?
Notes 
This video features the following concepts:
•	 The video starts by defining the concepts of  rotation and revolution of  the Earth.
•	 The video then explains how the Earth rotates around itself  and revolves   
 around the Sun.
•	 It takes the Earth more time to revolve around the Sun and less time to rotate  
 around itself.
At this point, tell the students that ‘even though this video does not show it, scientists, 
in order to understand the rotation of  the Earth, draw an imaginary line through the 
centre of  the Earth. This line passes from the North Pole to the South Pole and is 
called the Earth’s axis’.
Draw a picture of  the Earth with its axis and arrows for rotation to show the students.
Formative assessment: Tell the students to carefully observe the picture of  the Earth 
with its axis and arrows for rotation. Ask them to describe the axis of  the Earth in 
their own words and to write and draw the descriptions in their science notebooks.
Sharing
Tell the students, ‘Now it is time to share what we learned from the video and the picture’.
Pick a few volunteers from the class and ask them to share their observations of  the 
video with the rest of  the class. Note these responses on the chart paper.
163
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Guiding questions
Conduct a class discussion to give students a chance to share their observations about 
the movements of  the Earth with their classmates. Use the following questions to 
guide the class discussion:
•	 Does the Earth spin around itself ? What is that motion called?
•	 Can anyone define the axis of  the Earth? Is it real? Why is it useful?
•	 Does the Earth move around the Sun? What is that motion called?
•	 Does anyone remember from lesson 1 what the path of  the Earth around the   
 Sun is called?
•	 Which movement takes Earth longer: rotation or revolution?
Bring out the chart paper from the introduction activity and show the students if  and how 
their answers to the guiding questions might have changed after watching the video.
Ask the students to note the observations from the video in their science notebooks.
Exploration 2
In this activity , students will make a human model of  the rotation and revolution of  
the Earth.
Divide the class into groups of  three students and ask the students to pick a Sun, an 
Earth, and a narrator in their groups. The role of  the narrator is to describe the model 
to the rest of  the class.
Give groups about five minutes to put together and act out their rotations and revolu-
tions of  the Earth.
Call each group one by one to the front of  the class to present their model. Observe if  
the students are depicting these movements correctly .
Ask the students to write about their reactions and observations of  the models.
Formative assessment: Ask the students to write one example of  rotation and one of  
revolution from their daily lives and describe why these movements are examples of  
rotation and revolution.
Share
Initiate a classroom discussion to give students a chance to share their experiences and 
observations from their own as well as their peers’ presentations. Use the following 
guiding questions.
Note student responses on the board and ask them to write them in their notebooks.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
164
Guiding questions
•	 How is the Earth’s rotation different from the Earth’s revolution?
•	 What is the shape of  the Earth’s orbit? (One is oval, and one is elliptical.)
•	 What natural phenomenon does the Earth’s rotation cause? (Day and night.)
•	 What natural phenomenon is the Earth’s revolution related to? (The seasons.)
Culminating activity
Formative assessment: Ask the students to draw a diagram of  the Sun and Earth 
with arrows indicating movements of  the Earth. The students should also draw and 
label the Earth’s axis.
Ask the students to write or draw two new things that they learned in this lesson. 
Tell the students that one of  these facts should be from the textbook. Ask the students 
to describe if  knowledge of  this fact from the textbook reading was clarified or not by 
the end of  this lesson. 
NOTE: The purpose of this step is to examine how students connect the knowledge they 
learned from the textbook to the in-class lesson.
Go over the responses to formative assessment activities with the students. Ask a few 
students to volunteer their responses and make any corrections if  needed. Ask the 
class to check responses and make any corrections if  needed. 
Tell the students that in the next lesson they will explore day and night, and leave them 
with the question, ‘What do you think causes day and night?’
Ask the students to read chapter 10, section 10.3 on page 90 from the grade 4 
science textbook.
Lesson 5: Day and night
Learning objectives
Learning targets
Success criteria
Vocabulary
rotation, revolution, Earth’s axis
165
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Materials required
•	 Globe
•	 Small-sized sticker
•	 Torch
•	 Lamp (without the cover) 
•	 Styrofoam ball 
•	 Three index cards
Introduction (connections to prior knowledge)
Start this section with a demonstration of  night and day by using a globe.
Gather all the students around a desk and bring out a globe. Ask the students to make 
predictions about what the globe represents (the Earth).
Ask the students if  they can find their location on the globe, and then put a small 
sticker on it. 
Turn off  all the lights in the classroom and shine a light on the globe. Ask the students 
to make predictions about what the torch represents. 
If  needed, provide the students with a hint by asking them the following question: 
‘Which object in the solar system provides the Earth with light? Think back to the first 
lesson in this unit’. (The Sun.)
Shine the torch directly onto the sticker indicating the city in which the school is located, 
and ask the students if  this demonstration represents day or night in their city (Day .)
Ask the students, ‘Explain why the demonstration at this point represents day?’ 
(Because our location is directly facing the sunlight.) 
Spin the globe to the other side and ask the students, ‘Now , is it day or night at our 
location (according to the demonstration)?’ (Night.)
Ask the students, ‘Please explain why the demonstration now represents night?’ (Because 
our location is facing away from the Sun, and it is not receiving any direct sunlight.)
Initiate a discussion to check for students’ understanding of  Earth’s rotation and 
revolution and day and night. Ask the students to make predictions about the 
following questions.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
166
Guiding questions
•	 What provides us with light during the day? (The Sun.)
•	 When an object spins around itself, what is that movement called? (Rotation.)
•	 Does the Earth rotate? (Yes.) 
•	 Around what does the Earth rotate? (Around its own axis.)
•	 When an object moves around another object, what is that movement called? 
(Revolution.)
•	 Does the Earth revolve? Around what does it revolve? (The Earth revolves 
around the Sun.)
•	 Can anyone explain why , during the demonstration, our location first faced 
toward the Sun and then away? In this case, we moved the globe by hand, but 
does that occur in real life? How does it occur?
¡¡ Because the Earth spins around itself  while revolving around the Sun, our 
location is sometimes in front of  the Sun (that is, in direct sunlight; day) and 
at other times away from the Sun (night).
¡¡ The movement of  the Earth moves our location to different points in 
reference to the Sun’s position.
After the discussion, ask the students to think about the question posed during the 
culminating activity of  the previous lesson: ‘What do you think causes day and night?’
Ask the students to write as well as draw their observations from the demonstration. 
(Ask the students to also keep the previous lesson about the movement of  the Earth in 
mind while writing and drawing their responses.)
Exploration
In this activity , students will learn about the causes of  day and night.
Divide the class into groups of  three students and give each group the materials (a 
lamp, a Styrofoam ball, and two index cards labelled ‘Sun’ and ‘Earth’).
Tell the students that they will demonstrate the Earth’s movements in relation to the position 
of  the Sun, and that each group will share their demonstration with the rest of  the class.
Tell the students that in each group one of  them should represent the Sun, one should 
represent the Earth, and one should be the narrator.
Ask the students to draw a diagram of  the phenomenon (the Earth’s movements in 
relation to the position of  the Sun) before acting it out.
Before working on their demonstration, ask students to make predictions about 
the following:
•	 What does the lamp represent? (The Sun.)
•	 What does the Styrofoam ball represent? (The Earth.)
•	 Which object rotates around its axis? (The Earth.)
•	 Which object revolves? (The Earth revolves around the Sun.)
167
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Ask a few volunteers from the class to share their responses with the rest of  the class.
Give the groups some time to put together their demonstrations, and during this time 
go around the classroom to check on every group.
Share
Ask each group to present their demonstration to the class.
Provide feedback to each group at the end of  their presentation.
Initiate a class discussion to give students a chance to share their observations of  their as 
well as their peers’ presentations. Use the following questions to guide the discussion.
Guiding questions
•	 What are some of  the limitations of  your demonstrations? (Think back to   
 lesson 2, where we studied scale models.)
¡¡ One limitation of  these models is that they are not to scale. The ratio 
between the sizes of  the Earth and the Sun are not true to size.
¡¡ The distances between the Earth and the Sun are also not represented to 
size.
¡¡ Also, the time it takes for the Earth to complete a rotation and revolution is 
not correct.
•	 Does anyone know how long it takes for the Earth to rotate around itself ?   
 (Twenty-four hours.)
•	 What is another term for this time period? (One complete calendar day .)
¡¡ One complete rotation of  the Earth around its axis takes 24 hours and   
 makes one complete day .
•	 Do all of  us living on Earth experience day or night at the same time? (No.)
•	 Why? 
¡¡ The Earth is constantly rotating around its axis, and so all regions on the 
Earth are not in front of  the Sun at the same time. Due to the constant 
rotation of  the Earth, different regions experience sunlight at different 
angles (in different amounts) at any point in time.
•	 How long does it take the Earth to orbit around the Sun? (One year: 365 days.)
Culminating activity
Tell the students that the rotation of  the Earth around its axis while revolving around 
the Sun causes day and night in different time zones because different regions on 
Earth receive different amounts of  light at any point in time.
Ask the students to take a few minutes to write in their science notebooks about what they 
have learned about the occurrence of  day and night. This account should include the role 
of  the Sun and the rotation of  the Earth around its axis in causing day and night.
Students should include at least one fact about the occurrence of  day and night that 
they learned from their textbook.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
168
Ask the students to explain if  their textbook reading about the occurrence of  day and 
night was clarified or not after lesson. The students can also comment on how their 
textbook reading about the occurrence of  day and night was enhanced and what (if  
any) confusion still remains after the lesson.
Ask the students to trade their science notebook with another student sitting next to them. 
After they have traded their notebooks, each student will check the formative assess-
ment responses of  their peers.
Ask a few students to volunteer their responses to the formative assessment activities 
and make any corrections if  needed.
Ask the students to check their peers’ formative assessment responses and correct 
them if  needed. 
Tell the students that in the next lesson they will learn about the occurrence of  the 
seasons. Ask them to read chapter 10, section 10.5, on page 93 from their science textbook.
Reference: teachHouston, University of  Houston. Retrieved 29 April, 2012.
 Ø http://teachhouston.uh.edu/TeachHouston_document/lesson_plans1/science_ 
 lesson/files/Day%20and%20Night-Final_5-21-10.pdf
Lesson 6: Reason for seasons
Learning objectives
Learning targets
Success criteria
Vocabulary
Earth’s axis, tilt, northern hemisphere, southern hemisphere, Earth’s equator
Materials required
•	 Computer with an Internet connection 
•	 Globe 
•	 Lamp without shade
Introduction (connections to prior knowledge)
In this section, check for students’ knowledge of  concepts (northern hemisphere, 
southern hemisphere, and equator) that are necessary for understanding this lesson. 
Use this time to connect previous lessons learned to concepts in this lesson. 
169
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Initiate a discussion to check students’ understanding of  background concepts for 
this lesson. 
Ask the students about the following and note their responses.
Guiding questions
•	 Can we remember from our previous lesson what the axis of  the Earth is? 
¡¡ It is an imaginary line going through the centre of  the Earth. The Earth   
 rotates around its axis.
•	 How long does it take the Earth to complete a rotation on its own axis? 
(Twenty-four hours.)
•	 What causes day and night? (The Earth’s rotation on its axis.)
•	 Can anyone tell us about the position of  the Earth’s axis? Is it straight or tilted 
at an angle? 
¡¡ The students might not know the answer to this question. After taking a 
few responses from the students, share with them that the axis of  the Earth 
is not straight. It is tilted slightly at an angle of  about 23.5 degrees. Tell the 
students this concept is very important for today’s lesson and we will explore 
it later in the lesson.
¡¡ Bring a globe for demonstration to show the students how the Earth’s axis 
is tilted. 
NOTE: Students should understand that the Earth’s axis is an imaginary line and that there 
is no actual line going through the Earth. We use the imaginary axis to help us calculate 
the tilt in the Earth’s position. 
Ask the students to draw a labelled diagram of  the Sun and the Earth with its 
axis. The diagram should also show the equator, the northern hemisphere, and 
the southern hemisphere. You may need to explain the northern and southern 
hemispheres and the equator.
(Note: Students’ diagrams should show the 23.5-degree tilt in Earth’s axis.)
•	 What are seasons?
•	 What causes seasons? 
¡¡ A common misconception: Many students think that the seasons are caused 
by the distance of  the Earth from the Sun; that is, they believe that when the 
Earth is farther away from the Sun it is winter, and when it is closer to the 
Sun, it is summer.
¡¡ To clarify this misconception, ask the students if  all parts of  the Earth 
experience winter and summer at the same time. The answer is no, and 
this is proof  for the fact that the summer and winter are not caused by 
the distance of  Earth from the Sun. When it is winter in the northern 
hemisphere, it is summer in the southern hemisphere, and vice versa. If  
seasons changed because of  the distance of  the Earth from the Sun, both 
hemispheres would experience summer and winter at the same time.
Note the students’ responses on the board. These responses will be very important in 
assessing how much the students know about the seasons.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
170
Tell the students that in this lesson we will explore the causes of  the different seasons.
Exploration 1
Tell students that during this activity , they will explore how the Earth’s tilted axis and 
the Earth’s revolution around the Sun cause the change in seasons.
During this activity , students will watch a video animation of  what causes seasons to change.
Draw a round circle (Earth) on a board and then draw a line across the middle to 
show the equator. 
Check for students’ knowledge of  some concepts necessary for understanding the 
causes of  the seasons. 
Guiding questions
Ask students the following questions to lead the discussion. Point to the diagram of  
the Earth and ask the following questions:
•	 What is the equator? (It is an imaginary line drawn across the middle of  the 
globe that divides the Earth into the northern and southern hemispheres.)
•	 What is a hemisphere? (Hemisphere in Greek means ‘half  of  a sphere’, so a 
hemisphere of  Earth is half  of  the Earth.)
•	 Can anyone name the two hemispheres? (The northern hemisphere and the 
southern hemisphere. The northern hemisphere is the half  of  the Earth north 
of  the equator, and the southern hemisphere is the half  of  the Earth south of  
the equator.)
Label the diagram of  the Earth as the definitions come up during the discussion.
After the discussion is over, show the students the video ‘Science for Kids: How Do 
Seasons Change?’ The video can be found at:
 Ø http://www .videojug.com/film/why-does-the-earth-have-seasons
After viewing the video, ask the students to take a few minutes to write down their 
observations and reactions to the video. 
Ask the students to write down at least two interesting things they remember from 
the video.
Share
Initiate a discussion in which students share what they learned from the video. 
Ask students to share at least one interesting fact they learned from the video. Take a 
few responses and note them on the board. 
Clarify any further misconceptions the students might have about the concepts from 
the video.
171
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Initiate a class discussion to give the students a chance to share their observations 
about the video with their peers and use the following guiding questions to conduct 
the classroom discussion.
Guiding questions
•	 Is the Earth’s axis straight? (No, it is tilted at about 23.5 degrees.)
•	 How does the tilt in the Earth’s axis affect the sunlight hitting the Earth? 
¡¡ Because of  the tilt, the sunlight hits the Earth at different angles, and so   
 different parts of  the Earth receive different amounts of  sunlight.
•	 How does the tilt cause changes in the seasons on Earth? 
¡¡ During Earth’s revolution around the Sun, its tilt (direction of  the axis) 
always points in the same direction. When Earth is at one place in its path, 
the northern hemisphere faces more direct sunlight as compared to the 
southern hemisphere, and when the Earth moves to the opposite location, 
the other hemisphere receives more direct sunlight. The hemisphere that 
faces more sunlight experiences summer and the other experiences winter.
Note the responses to these questions on the board. Ask the students to note their as 
well as their peers’ observations in their science notebooks.
Exploration 2
Start this exploration by asking the students to make predictions about the following 
questions and write their responses on the board.
•	 How do we know when seasons change? (We see flowers bloom, birds migrate,  
 and we experience hot or cold temperatures.) 
•	 How does the weather change in different seasons?
•	 Why do seasons change? 
Ask the students to describe the hottest day they can remember. Take the responses 
from a few students and note them on the board.
Ask the students to describe the coldest day they can remember. Take responses from 
a few students and note them on the board. 
Divide the students into groups of  three or four and provide each group with 
materials (lamp without a shade, a globe, and a small sticker).
Turn off  the classroom light and ask the students to turn on their lamps.
Help the groups to locate their town on the map and ask them to place a small 
sticker on it. 
Fix a marker in the classroom (such as a picture, a flagpole, etc.). Make sure the axes 
of  all the globes point toward this marker at all times during this activity . This will 
help students simulate the fact that the direction of  the Earth’s axis never changes.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
172
Ask the students, ‘Why do we have the axes of  all the globes pointing toward this marker?’
NOTE: Students should understand that the Earth’s axis always points in the same direction. 
Go around the class to make sure that the students are performing this step correctly .
Ask the students to tilt the globe so that the sticker faces the lamp. 
Instruct the students to make sure that the tilt of  the globe is always facing toward the 
marker (in the same direction) at all times during this activity .
Ask the students, ‘What season is it in the northern hemisphere?’ It is summer 
because the northern hemisphere is facing the Sun and receiving the maximum 
amount of  sunlight. The maximum exposure to sunlight is causing the northern 
hemisphere to heat up more than the southern hemisphere.
Ask the group to slowly rotate the globe around its axis (while the Earth’s axis points 
toward the marker in the classroom at all times) and observe the northern hemisphere as 
the day goes by . Direct the students to note their observations in their science notebooks. 
Even though the northern hemisphere (the top half  of  the Earth) experiences day and 
night (due to rotation of  the Earth around its own axis), it experiences more sunlight 
during the day because at that point in the Earth’s orbit around the Sun, it is tilted 
toward the Sun and so receives more direct sunlight.
Show the students the diagram on the following website to explain the concept further:
 Ø http://scienceforkids.kidipede.com/physics/weather/seasons.htm
NOTE: The person in the diagram is located in the northern hemisphere, and seasons 
listed on the diagram refer to the northern hemisphere (the location specifically indicated 
by the human figure).
Tell the students that one of  the students in the group (while holding the globe and 
keeping the tilt of  the axis in the same direction) should go around the lamp (the Sun) 
and stop at the opposite location (on the other side of  the lamp). In this position, the 
southern hemisphere of  the globe should be facing the lamp.
Ask the students, ‘What season is it in the northern hemisphere now? Why?’ It is 
winter because now the northern hemisphere is facing away from the Sun, and so it is 
not receiving direct sunlight, which causes it to remain cool.
At the end of  the activity , to clarify the importance of  the Earth’s tilt in creating 
seasons, tell the students, ‘Now we are going to model what would happen if  the 
Earth was not tilted’. Ask the students to note their predictions about what would 
happen if  the Earth’s axis were straight. 
173
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Ask the groups to straighten their globes and while holding them revolve around the 
lamp to test their predictions.
Students should write or draw their predictions and observations in their science notebooks.
Share
Initiate a class discussion to give students a chance to share their observations and 
predictions with their peers. Use the following questions to conduct the class discussion:
•	 What did you observe during this activity? Share at least one observation.
•	 What do you think would happen if  the Earth were not tilted? (We would not 
experience seasons because most of  the Earth would receive a similar amount 
of  light at all times.)
•	 During the experiment, why did we make sure the Earth’s axis was tilted and 
always pointed in the same direction? (In reality the Earth’s axis is tilted and 
always points in the same direction.)
•	 What is the angle of  the Earth’s tilt? (23.5 degrees.)
•	 Do all places on Earth experience the same season at the same time? (No.)
•	 Why? (Because of  the Earth’s tilt, when the northern hemisphere is facing the 
Sun, experiencing summer, the southern hemisphere is facing away from the 
Sun, experiencing winter. When it is summer in the northern hemisphere, it is 
winter in the southern hemisphere, and vice versa.)
•	 Why do we have different seasons?
Note the student responses on the board. Ask them to write their as well as their 
peers’ observations in their science notebooks.
Culminating activity
Ask the students to explain in their own words the reason for the seasons and note 
it in their science notebooks. The explanation should include why the hemispheres 
experience different seasons at any given time. 
The students can write and/or draw their explanations. The explanation should 
include the role of  the permanent tilt in the Earth’s axis and the Earth’s revolution 
around the Sun in creating seasons.
Ask the students to write down if  their reading from the textbook about the 
occurrence of  seasons was clarified or not after the lesson. The students also can 
comment on how their reading from the textbook was enhanced by this lesson and 
what (if  any) unanswered questions still remain.
Ask the students to trade their science notebooks with a student sitting next to them. 
After they have exchanged their notebooks, each student will check the formative 
assessment responses of  their peers.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
174
Ask a few students to volunteer their responses to the formative assessment activities 
and make any corrections if  needed.
Ask the students to check their peers’ formative assessment responses and correct 
them if  needed. 
Collect students’ science notebooks at the end of  the class to check:
•	 their written work
•	 their answers to formative assessments
•	 that the students are making necessary corrections to their formative   
 assessment r esponses during self-check and peer-check activities.
Reference: CASES, ‘What Causes Seasons?’ Retrieved 1 May , 2012 from:
 Ø http://cases.soe.umich.edu/plans.
php?nav=showplan&dqid=320&lpid=32774&printfriendly=yes&packet=n
Lesson 7: Phases of the Moon
Learning objectives 
Students will:
•	 know that the Moon does not generate any light; it only reflects the light from the Sun
•	 learn that the Moon revolves around the Earth in a counter-clockwise fashion
•	 understand that the journey of  the Moon around the Earth is called a lunar, or 
Moon phase, cycle
•	 know that it takes the Moon approximately 28 days* to complete one lunar cycle
•	 learn that there are four major phases of  the Moon
•	 be familiar with the names of  the four major phases of  the Moon.
Learning targets
Students will:
•	 learn that the Moon revolves around the Earth in a counter-clockwise fashion
•	 understand that the journey of  the Moon around the Earth is called a lunar, 
or Moon phase, cycle, which takes approximately 28 days and represents one 
calendar month
•	 be familiar with the names of  the four major phases of  the Moon and the position 
of  the Moon in relation to the Earth and the Sun during these four phases.
* The time between two full moons (a Lunar 
cycle) is about 29.5 days. However, the  
time it takes the Moon to make one orbit 
around the Earth is about 27.5 days. This 
difference is caused by the fact that the 
Earth-Moon system is orbiting around 
the Sun at the same time the Moon is 
orbiting around the Earth. For simplicity, 
this document talks about the lunar cycle 
and the Moon’s orbit around the Earth  
as if they are the same duration, approxi-
mately 28 days.
175
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Success criteria
Students will:
•	 draw a labelled diagram of  the Earth and Moon system and represent the 
direction of  the Moon’s movement with an arrow
•	 write the names of  four major lunar phases in correct order
•	 write an explanation of  the lunar cycle in their own words
•	 depict the position of  the Moon in relation to the Earth and Sun during each of  
the four lunar phases, in a Moon-phase book. 
Vocabulary
crescent, first-quarter phase, full Moon phase, gibbous, lunar cycle, last-quarter phase, new 
Moon phase, waning, waxing
Materials required
•	 Styrofoam balls (one for each student)
•	 Lamp without a shade
Advance preparation
•	 A month before this lesson, ask students to take some time every evening to 
observe the Moon and draw the shape of  the Moon in their science notebooks. 
•	 Instruct the students to be sure to put the date on every Moon observation and 
continue the exercise for a month.
•	 If  the students are not able to see the Moon due to weather conditions, they 
should still put the date for that night and leave the observation section blank.
Introduction (connections to prior knowledge)
Initiate a discussion to find out what students already know about the Moon and its phases.
Ask the students to take out their science notebooks in which they made their Moon 
observations during the previous month.
Initiate the discussion by asking the students the following questions.
Guiding questions
•	 What do you know about the Moon? 
¡¡ It revolves around the Earth. It takes a month, or approximately 28 days, to  
 complete a revolution around the Earth. 
•	 Does the Moon move? (Yes.)
•	 Around what does the Moon move? (It rotates around itself  and revolves 
around the Earth.)
•	 How long does it take the Moon to revolve around the Earth? (approximately 28 days)
¡¡ A common misconception: Students might also say that the Moon emits light. 
Make sure to let students know that the Moon does not emit light, but rather 
it reflects the light of  the Sun and that is the reason we are able to see it.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
176
•	 What did you see while drawing the Moon during the last month? (The Moon 
seemed to change its shape.)
•	 How does the Moon change its shape? (It seems to disappear and reappear. The 
shapes repeat after two weeks.)
•	 Why do you think the Moon changes it shape? 
¡¡ Students might not know the answer to this question, but it is a critical 
question in that it tells the teacher what students know about the phases of  
the Moon. 
Note the students’ responses on the board. 
Tell the students that this lesson will explore the phases of  the Moon and why they occur.
Exploration 1
The students will take a virtual trip to the Moon to observe what causes the phases of  
the Moon.
Show the students the following two videos.
The first video, ‘The Phases of  the Moon’, can be found at:
 Ø http://www .youtube.com/watch?v=0vXWXqGmPCk
This video explains that the phases of  the Moon are caused by its position relative to 
the Earth and the Sun. Because only one side of  the Moon is visible to us (because 
that side is lit up by the Sun), the portion of  the side of  the Moon that we can see 
depends upon the Moon’s position in its orbit around the Earth. In other words, 
because the Moon keeps moving in an elliptical path around the Earth, we on Earth 
can only see different portions of  the lit-up side of  the Moon.
Share
Initiate a discussion with the students to process the content they learned in the 
video and use the following questions to guide the classroom discussion. Note the 
student responses on the board and ask them to write down their own and their peers’ 
observations in their science notebooks.
Guiding questions
•	 How long does it take the Moon to revolve around the Earth and complete the 
cycle of  its phases, also called the lunar cycle? (approximately 28 days.)
•	 What causes the phases of  the Moon? (By the position of  the Moon relative to 
the position of  the Sun and the Earth.)
•	 Does the Sun light the entire Moon? (No, half  the Moon is always lit by the Sun, 
and that is the side of  the Moon that we can see from the Earth.)
•	 Can we see the entire lit-up side of  the Moon? 
¡¡ At one point in the Moon-phase cycle (the full Moon), we can see the entire 
lit-up side of  the Moon. At other times in the lunar cycle, we see portions of  
the lit-up side of  the Moon, and these portions depend on the position of  the 
Moon in its orbit around the Earth.
177
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
After the discussion, show the students the second video, ‘The Universe: The Phases 
of  the Moon’, which can be found at:
 Ø http://www .youtube.com/watch?v=WD-H1xqoAAg&feature=relmfu
This video also explains the phases of  the Moon and has a simple way of  naming the 
phases. Only show the first 2 minutes and 12 seconds of  this video.
Share
Initiate a discussion with the students to process the content they learned in the video 
and use the following questions to guide the classroom discussion. Note students’ 
responses on the board and ask them to write down their own and their peers’ 
observations in their science notebook.
Guiding questions
•	 When none of  the lit-up side of  the Moon is visible from the Earth, what is the 
Moon’s position relative to the Earth and the Sun? (The Moon is between the 
Earth and the Sun.) 
•	 What is this phase called? (The ‘new Moon phase’ marks the beginning of  the 
lunar cycle.)
•	 How does the Moon move around the Earth? (Counter-clockwise.)
•	 When can we see the half  of  the lit-up side of  the Moon? 
¡¡ When the Moon starts to move counter-clockwise around the Sun, we can 
see more and more of  the Moon. When the Moon is at a right angle with 
the Earth and the Sun, we can see half  of  the lit-up side of  the Moon. At this 
point, the Moon has completed one-quarter of  its cycle.
•	 What is this phase called? (It is called the first-quarter phase.)
•	 When can we see a full lit-up side of  the Moon during the lunar cycle?
¡¡ When the Moon moves to a position where it is in a straight line again with the 
Earth and the Sun, we can see a full Moon. At this point, the Earth is between 
the Sun and the Moon, and the Moon has completed one-half  of  its cycle.
•	 What is this phase called? (It is called the full Moon phase.)
•	 When does the visible portion of  the lit-up side of  the Moon begin to decrease? 
(When the Moon moves past its half-cycle position.)
•	 Do we see half  the Moon again? 
¡¡ Yes. We see half  the Moon in the lunar cycle when the Moon is at a right 
angle again with the Sun and the Earth. At this point the lunar cycle is 
three-quarters complete. 
•	 What is this phase of  the Moon called? (This phase is called the last-quarter phase.)
•	 What happens to the Moon in the last part of  the lunar cycle?
¡¡ When the Moon is in the last part of  the lunar cycle, it appears to become 
smaller and smaller, until it is in line with the Sun and the Earth again (back 
at its starting position). At this point, we do not see  the Moon. This is the 
new Moon phase).
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
178
NOTE: Students should write the answer to this question in their science notebooks.
•	 How long does it the Moon to go from one phase to another? (One week.)
•	 What does the Moon look like in between these phases? (Either a crescent 
Moon [less than half] or gibbous Moon [more than half].)
•	 What is the technical term that describes the Moon when it seems to be 
growing during the first half  of  its cycle? (Waxing.)
•	 When does the Moon seem to be waxing during its cycle? (During the first half  
of  the cycle.)
•	 What is the technical term that describes the Moon when it seems to become 
smaller and smaller? (Waning.)
•	 When does the Moon seem to be waning during its cycle? (During the last half  
of  its cycle.)
Exploration 2
In this activity , students will model the Sun, Earth, and the Moon to observe how 
phases of  the Moon occur.
Place a light source (the lamp without a shade) in the middle of  the room.
Ask the students to make predictions about what the lamp represents. (The Sun.)
Turn off  the lights to darken the room so that the Moon phases are more visible.
Give each student a Styrofoam ball and ask them to make predictions about what the 
ball represents. (The Moon.)
Tell the students that their heads represent the Earth. 
Ask the students to take the Styrofoam ball and gather around the light source (the Sun).
Ask the students to model the new Moon position; that is, where the Moon is situated 
in relation to the Earth and Sun during the new Moon phase. (Between the Earth and 
the Sun.)
Go around the room to check all the students’ models.
Ask the students in which direction the Moon revolves around the Earth. 
(Counter-clockwise.) 
Tell the students to turn their bodies counter-clockwise to keep the Earth facing the 
Moon and stop once they have completed one-forth of  the lunar cycle. 
Ask the students to notice the edge of  the shadow moving across the Moon and to 
stop and draw the shadow at this point.
179
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Tell the students to continue turning their bodies counter-clockwise until they have 
completed one-half  of  the revolution and the Sun is behind them. 
The students will have to raise the Moon (lift the ball up) so that the shadow of  their 
head does not interfere with the shadow cast on the Moon.
Ask the students to draw their observations of  the shadow on the Moon at this point.
Ask the students to continue their journey until they have completed three-quarters 
of  the revolution. The students should stop and note the appearance of  the Moon at 
this point in their science notebooks.
Ask the students to continue turning counter-clockwise until they have completed one 
full revolution (the lunar cycle) and note the appearance of  the Moon at this point in 
their notebooks.
Share
Initiate a discussion to give students a chance to share their observations with their 
peers. Use the following questions to guide the class discussion.
Guiding questions
•	 What are some of  the limitations of  this model? 
¡¡ The model is not to size. Only the Earth is moving and the Moon is staying  
 stationary , but in reality both the Earth and the Moon are in motion.
•	 What does the very first phase (when the ball is between the student and the 
lamp) represent? (This represents the new Moon phase, when the Moon is 
between the Earth and Sun.)
•	 How much of  the Moon is visible during this phase? (None, and that is why 
there is no shadow on the ball.) 
•	 How much of  the shadow on the ball did we see after one-quarter revolution 
was complete? (One-half  shadow .)
•	 What is this phase called in the lunar cycle? (The first-quarter phase.)
•	 How much of  the shadow was seen after one-half  revolution was complete? 
(The whole ball was lit up.) 
•	 What is this phase called in the lunar cycle? (The full Moon phase.)
•	 How much of  the shadow did we see after three-quarters of  the lunar cycle was 
complete? (One-half  of  the Moon was lit up.)
•	 What is this phase called in the lunar cycle? (The last-quarter phase.)
•	 Between the new Moon phase and the full Moon phase, what was happening to 
the appearance of  the Moon? (It appeared to become bigger and bigger.)
•	 What is this phenomenon called? (The waxing phase.)
•	 What was happening to the appearance of  the Moon between the full Moon 
phase (going toward the end of  the revolution) and the new Moon phase? (The 
Moon appeared to become smaller and smaller.)
•	 What is this phenomenon called? (The waning phase.)
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
180
Note student responses on the board. Ask the students to write down their own as 
well as their peers’ observations in their science notebooks.
Culminating activity
Ask the students to take a few minutes and write down what they learned about the 
Moon phases. What fascinated them about the phases of  the Moon? What questions 
do they still have about the lesson?
Formative assessment: Ask the students to draw a labelled diagram of  the Earth and 
the Moon system in their science notebooks and depict the direction of  the Moon’s 
movement with an arrow .
Ask the students to keep their science notebooks open and go over the formative 
assessments to give them a chance to correct their answers.
Ask a few students to share their responses and make any needed corrections. 
Ask the whole class to check their formative assessment responses and make any 
corrections if  need. 
Reference: Utah Education Network, ‘Phases of  the Moon’, 2002. Retrieved 6 May , 2012.
 Ø http://www .uen.org/Lessonplan/preview?LPid=623
181
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 2, week 4, session 1
Sun, Earth, and the Moon unit: 
Instructor’s copy
This copy is prepared for Instructors’ use and contains the learning objectives, learning 
targets, success criteria, and formative assessments for all lessons of  the ‘Sun, Earth, and 
the Moon’ unit. The learning objectives, learning targets, success criteria, and formative 
assessments (pertaining only to success criteria) from lessons 2, 3, 5, and 6 have been 
omitted from the Student Teachers’ copies of  this unit. The reason for this omission 
is that one of  activities asks Student Teachers to use lessons 1, 4, and 7 as examples to 
create learning objectives, learning targets, success criteria, and formative assessments 
(pertaining only to success criteria) for lessons 2, 3, 5, and 6. The Student Teachers can 
either add the formative assessment activities or find ones that are already built into 
the lessons. The assessment activities added to or identified in the lessons should aim at 
assessing students’ mastery of  the success criteria of  the lessons.
Description of the unit 
The ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’ is a seven-lesson mini-science unit for grade 4 or 5. 
This unit uses interactive and participatory teaching methods to teach students about 
the Sun, Earth, and the Moon system. Each lesson in this unit is designed to be 1–1.5 
hours long. 
Learning goal for the unit
Students will understand the interactions between the Sun, Earth, and the Moon and 
how these interactions affect life on Earth.
Lesson 1: Objects in the sky
Learning objectives
Students will:
•	 understand that the universe is vast and has millions of  different types of  
objects, including our solar system
•	 understand that the Sun is the centre of  our solar system, which has eight planets
•	 recognize the position of  the Sun, Earth, and its Moon in the solar system
•	 know that all the planets revolve around the Sun in a circular path
•	 know the meaning of  orbit and that paths of  the planets around the Sun are 
called orbits.
Learning targets
Students will:
•	 understand that Sun is the centre of  our solar system, which has eight planets
•	 recognize the position of  the Sun, Earth, and its Moon in the solar system
•	 know that all the planets revolve around the Sun in a circular path called an orbit.
F
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
182
Success criteria
Students will:
•	 write the names of  all eight planets in correct order
•	 draw a labelled diagram of  the Sun, Earth, and the Moon to show their   
 correct positions
•	 draw and label the paths of  the Earth and Moon. 
Vocabulary
solar system, planets, Sun, orbit, Moon, star
Advanced preparation
Assign the students the following homework the day before this lesson:
•	 Spend 10 minutes observing the sky at night and write and draw the objects  
 in the sky .
•	 Write about your experiences and reactions while viewing the sky .
Materials required
•	 Chart paper 
•	 Internet connection 
•	 Video projector
Introduction (connections to prior knowledge)
Initiate a discussion to find out what students already know about the solar system, Earth, 
Sun, and the Moon. Ask students the following questions to conduct a class discussion:
•	 What do you know about the Sun?
•	 What do you know about the Earth?
•	 What do you know about the Moon?
•	 How are the Sun, Earth, and the Moon related?
Note student replies on a piece of  chart paper so they can be used later in this lesson 
or the unit.
Exploration 1
Take students to the play yard and ask them to observe the sky and note the objects 
they see. The students should write and/or draw these objects. Encourage the stu-
dents to draw any observations or conclusions about the size and number of  objects 
or any other observations about the sky in general.  
Ask the students to make a comprehensive list of  images from the day and night skies. 
Ask the students to note down the objects that they think exist in the sky but might 
not have been visible to them during the day and night observations.
183
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Share
Bring all the students back to the classroom and give them a chance to share 
their observations.
Note students’ observations on a chart paper.
Initiate a class discussion about the students’ experiences during their sky observations. 
Use the following guiding questions and write the students’ responses on the blackboard.
Guiding questions
•	 What are the different types of  objects you saw in the sky?
•	 Were all the objects in the sky visible to us? Might there be other objects in the 
sky? Name them.
•	 What do you know about the Sun? 
•	 Ask the students to write down at least three things they know about the solar system.
Take a few student volunteers and ask them to share their responses with the rest of  
the class. Write these responses on the blackboard. 
Exploration 2
In this activity , students will act like young astronauts and take a trip to the solar 
system through a short video.
During the video, students should write down and/or draw least five interesting 
things about the solar system.
Show the following video, ‘Solar System Animation for Kids’, to the class. The video is 
7 minutes and 41 seconds long: 
 Ø http://www .youtube.com/watch?v=sJrDiUG2JAo
Notes 
This video features the following concepts:
•	 Even things big in size will look smaller from a distance. This gives the children 
an idea that the stars and planets look small from the Earth because they are 
really far away .
•	 It showcases the solar system and its planets and gives the order of  the planets.
•	 It goes over the sizes of  different planets and their few distinguishing features.
Share
Tell the students, ‘Now that our space trip is over, let us share what we observed 
during our journey to space’. Take responses from as many students as time allows 
and note them on the blackboard. 
Ask the students to write these responses in their science notebooks.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
184
Guiding questions
Initiate a class discussion to give students a chance to share their observations with the 
whole class. Use the following guiding questions to conduct the classroom discussion 
and note students’ responses on the blackboard. Ask the students to write their 
classmates’ observations in their science notebooks. 
•	 Describe the solar system in your own words.
•	 Why do objects in space seem so small?
•	 What is the position of  our Earth and Moon in the solar system? Is the Moon  
  also a planet?
•	 Is the Moon smaller, bigger, or the same size as the Sun? Why?
•	 Are planets stationary or in motion? Can anyone describe their motion?
•	 What are the paths of  the planets called and where does that name comes from?
Ask students to note these observations in their notebooks if  they have missed them 
during the video.
Refer to the chart paper from the introduction activity and Exploration 1 and explore 
with the students how and why their responses have changed or not changed after 
their virtual tour to the solar system.
Culminating activity
Formative assessment: Ask the students to write down the names of  the eight 
planets in correct order.
Formative assessment: Ask the students to also draw a labelled diagram of  the Sun, 
Earth, and the Moon in their correct positions. Also draw and label the paths of  the 
Earth and the Moon.
NOTE: At this point, students can use their judgement to capture the sizes in this diagram. 
Go over the formative assessment answers with the students.
Ask a few students to share their answers with the class. Make corrections if  needed. 
Ask all the students to check their answers and make any corrections if  needed. 
Tell students that they will further explore the relative sizes of  the Sun, Moon, and the 
Earth in the next lesson. 
185
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Lesson 2: How big, how far
Learning objectives
Students will:
•	 understand the concept of  a scale model.
•	 understand the relative size differences between the Sun, Earth, and the Moon
•	 be able to understand the relative distances between the Sun, Earth, and the Moon
•	 know that the Sun’s diameter is more than 100 times as big as the Earth’s 
diameter, and the Earth is about 100 Sun diameters away from the Sun
•	 understand that the Moon’s diameter is around one-fourth the size of  Earth’s 
diameter, and it is about 30 Earths away from the Earth.
Learning targets
Students will:
•	 understand the concept of  a scale model
•	 know that the Sun’s diameter is more than 100 times as big as the Earth’s 
diameter and the Earth is about 100 Sun diameters away from the Sun
•	 understand that the Moon’s diameter is around one-fourth the size of  Earth’s 
diameter and it is about 30 Earths away from the Earth.
Success criteria
Students will:
•	 create a scale model (representing correct relative sizes) of  the Sun, Earth, and 
the Moon system using different-sized objects
•	 act out a scale model (depicting correct relative sizes and distances) of  the Sun, 
Earth, and the Moon system.
Vocabulary
scale model, diameter, ruler
Materials required
•	 A blown-up balloon (one metre in diameter) 
•	 Several balls of  different sizes (1 centimetre, 5 centimetres, 10 centimetres) 
•	 A football
•	 A few coriander seeds or peppercorns (two to three millimetres)
Introduction (connections to prior knowledge) 
Students will look at how big the Sun, Earth, and the Moon are when compared to one 
another and how far they are located from one another. Students should look at their 
observations and drawings from the previous lesson.
Exploration 1
In this activity , students will investigate the sizes of  the Sun, Earth, and the Moon by 
using scale models.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
186
Check the students’ understanding of  a scale model by asking, ‘What is a scale 
model?’ Students should write down their predictions of  what a scale model is in 
their science notebooks.
Take responses from a few students. Then tell them that when we reduce the size of  all 
parts of  an object by the same proportion, it is called a scale model of  the object. A globe 
is an example of  a scale model of  the Earth because the sizes of  all the large bodies of  
Earth (the continents and oceans) have been reduced by the same proportion.
Ask the students to give at least three examples of  scale models and write them in 
their notebooks.
Divide the class into groups of  three or four students and provide them objects of  
different sizes. Each group should get a balloon and three balls of  different sizes (1 
centimetre, 5 centimetres, 10 centimetres), a football, and a few coriander seeds.
Show the students the blown-up balloon and ask, ‘If  we assume that the Sun is as big 
as this balloon, how big do you think the Earth and the Moon are?’  
Take a ruler and put it across the diameter of  the balloon to make sure that the 
students understand the concept of  diameter. Tell the students that the balloon is one 
metre across, which means it is 1 metre in diameter.
NOTE: The teacher should blow the balloon to one metre diameter. Before demonstrating 
the diameter with the ruler, draw a diagram on the blackboard to explain diameter to the 
students Use the diagram below as a guide. The line drawn across the widest part of the 
balloon should measure one metre.
Ask the students to pick two items to represent the Earth and the Moon.
Give each group a chance to share their assumptions with the class.
Tell the students that the Sun’s diameter is about 100 times greater than the Earth’s 
diameter, which means we will need 100 Earths to stretch across the Sun.
Give the students some time to come up with ideas to calculate the diameter of  the Earth.
Help each group come to the conclusion that they should use a one-centimetre ball 
to represent the Earth because the Earth’s diameter is a 100 times smaller than the 
Sun’s diameter. 
Ask the students to make predictions about which object they could place 100 times 
across the surface of  the balloon.
187
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Ask students if  they want to change the object they chose earlier to represent the 
Earth (based on the new information they now have) and give them a few moments 
to correct their model of  the Earth.
Tell the students that the Moon’s diameter is one-fourth the diameter of  the Earth, 
and ask them to find the diameter of  the Moon based on this information. 
Go around the class to help groups calculate the diameter of  the Moon and make sure 
that they calculate it correctly as two to three millimetres. 
Ask the students if  they need to change their model of  the Moon based on this new 
information and give them a few moments to do that.
Ask the students to note their observations and reactions after finding out about the 
size differences between the Sun, Earth, and the Moon and encourage them to write 
as well as draw their observations and reactions.
NOTE: Students should always use their science notebooks for their science class work 
and homework.
Share
Ask a student from each group to share their observations and reactions with the class.
Ask the students, ‘Keeping our model of  the Sun, Earth, and the Moon in mind, can 
anyone tell me how much smaller the Moon is as compared to the Earth?’
Take a few student responses from the class and write them down on the board or 
chart paper.
Discuss this question with the students and make any corrections if  required.
Ask the students to note their classmates’ responses in their science notebooks.
Exploration 2 
In this activity , students will investigate relative distances between the Sun, Earth, and 
the Moon.
Before starting the activity , ask the students to make predictions about the distances 
between the Sun, Earth, and the Moon. Ask the students the following question to 
guide their predictions: ‘In your opinion, is the Sun closer to the Earth or the Moon? 
Why do you think that?’
Remind the students of  the video they watched in lesson 1 and their notes from the 
video about why the Sun and the Moon look as if  they were the same size, even 
though they now know that the Sun is about 400 times bigger than the Moon.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
188
The students should be able to make the connections between lessons 1 and 2 that the 
farther an object is, the smaller it looks. The Sun’s farther distance from the Earth as 
compared to the Moon makes the Sun appear to be the same size as the Moon.
Ask each group to pick members to represent the Sun, Earth, and the Moon.
Tell the students to estimate how far the Earth and the Moon are from the Sun and 
stand accordingly while holding the objects representing the Sun, Earth, and the Moon. 
For example, the student representing the Sun should hold the balloon in their hands, 
the student representing the Earth should hold a one-centimetre ball in their hands, and 
the student representing the Moon should hold a small coriander seed in their hands. 
Go around the classroom to check the distance representation of  all the groups.
Ask for a volunteer from each group to interpret their representation.
Provide the students with the following information to check the accuracy of  their 
representation of  distances between the Sun, Earth, and the Moon.
•	 The Earth is about 100 Sun diameters away from the Sun, so if  our Sun is one 
metre, how far would it be from the Earth? 
¡¡ Give the students time to calculate the distance.
¡¡ The Earth would be 100 metres away from a one-metre-diameter Sun. 
•	 Tell the students that the Moon is about 30 Earth diameters away from the 
Earth and give them some time to calculate the distance between the Earth and 
the Moon.
¡¡ The Moon would be 30 centimetres away from a one-centimetre-diameter Earth.
Help students realize that the Moon is a lot closer to the Earth as compared to the Sun.
Take the students to a nearby playground and ask them to stand in position (according 
to the distances they calculated) to represent the Sun, Earth, and the Moon.
Ask the students to write down their observations and reactions in their notebooks.
Reference: Education Development Center, Kendall/Hunt Publishing, National 
Science Foundation, ‘Sun, Earth and Moon’. Insights: An Elementary Hands-on Inquiry 
Science Curriculum, Teacher guide, 2nd ed.(Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt, 2007), 
195–197.
Share
Ask at least one person from each group to share their observations and reactions 
after looking at how far the Sun, Earth, and the Moon are from each other.
Ask the students to make predictions about the travel time between the Moon and the Earth.
189
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Take responses from a few students and write them down on the board. Share with 
the students that it takes an astronaut about three days to travel between the Earth 
and the Moon even in a rocket going as fast as 6 kilometres per second. 
Ask the students, ‘Now that you know how long it takes to go to the Moon, can 
anyone predict how long it will take to travel to the Sun on the same rocket?’
Share with the students that it will take several months to reach the Sun, but the Sun 
is so hot that we cannot even get close to it.
Reference: Joan Board, Stargazing Live: Lesson Plans (BBC Learning, 2012), 6–7. 
Retrieved 19 April, 2012. 
 Ø http://downloads.bbc.co.uk/tv/guides/BBC_Stargazing_Live_2012_Lesson_
plans_KS2.pdf
Culminating activity
Ask the students to write and/or draw three new things they learned in this lesson.
Go over the formative assessments to give students a chance to correct their answers.
Tell the students to read chapter 10, pages 89–90, from their science textbook.
Lesson 3: Endless Earth
Learning objectives
Students will:
•	 be familiar with the concept of  spherical shapes
•	 know that the Earth is a sphere
•	 be able to explain why they think that the Earth is a sphere
•	 be familiar with the discovery that the Earth is a sphere.
Learning targets
Students will:
•	 be familiar with the concept of  spherical-shapes
•	 be able to explain why they think that the Earth is a sphere.
Success criteria
Students will:
•	 give at least two examples of  spherical-shaped objects 
•	 give at least three evidences for the fact that the Earth is a sphere.
Vocabulary
sphere, satellite, Earth
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
190
Materials required
•	 Printouts of  the story ‘How Did We Find Out that the Earth Is Round?’ by   
 Isaac Asimov (one per student)
•	 Printouts of  satellite pictures of  the Earth 
Introduction (connections to prior knowledge)
Initiate a discussion to find out what students know about the shape of  the Earth. 
Probe students to talk about their idea of  the shape of  the Earth and how they came 
to their conclusions.
Ask the students, ‘Imagine that you are in space looking directly at our Earth. What 
do you think the Earth will look like?’ Ask them to make predictions and draw this 
view of  the Earth from space.
After giving students a few minutes to draw , share with the students that people’s 
ideas about the Earth’s shape have changed over the years and the next activity will 
explore this topic in detail.
Exploration 1
In this activity , students will discuss how people in the past found out that the Earth is 
a sphere.
Check students’ knowledge of  the definition of  sphere. If  the students are not aware of  the 
meaning of  sphere, show them a few spherical shapes such as a cricket ball, tennis ball, or 
an orange to make sure the students understand what a spherical shape looks like. 
After showing them a few spherical shapes, ask the students to come up with at least 
two examples of  a sphere and write and/or draw them in their notebooks. Ask a few 
students to share their examples with the class and note them on the board. 
Use the story ‘How Did We Find Out that the Earth Is Round?’ by Isaac Asimov 
(pages 1 to 10). It can be retrieved at:
 Ø http://www .arvindguptatoys.com/arvindgupta/earthpix.pdf
Tell the students that while reading the book, they should keep the following 
questions in mind:
•	 What were people’s very first ideas about the shape of  the Earth?
•	 Why were those ideas disregarded?
•	 What evidence did people find that supported the idea that the Earth had a   
 spherical shape?
Read the first few pages with the students and point out the important elements in the 
text. This exercise will teach students how to pay attention to crucial details. Ask the 
students to finish reading the rest of  the book on their own.
191
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Ask the students to work in groups of  two or three and answer the questions (listed at 
the beginning of  this activity) by reading until the end of  page 10 (the end of  section 
3, ‘The Disappearing Ships’). 
Ask the students to note the evidence (answers to questions presented at the top of  
this activity) and their ideas in their science notebooks.
Share
After the students are finished reading and recording their ideas, ask one student from 
each group to share his or her ideas with the rest of  the class. Write down these ideas 
on the board.
Ask groups to write down anything they might have missed while making their 
observations.
Exploration 2
Mention to the students that people came to the conclusion that the Earth is a sphere 
(using the evidence discussed previously). At that time, people did not have modern 
equipment such as satellites to visit space and directly observe the shape of  the Earth. 
Ask the students: ‘What do you know about satellites?’ Note a few students’ responses 
on the board. 
Use student responses to construct a definition of  satellite and ask the students to 
write it down.
A satellite is a smaller object orbiting around a larger object. Scientists use electronic 
satellites to observe objects in space. 
Ask the students, ‘Can anyone give me an example of  a natural satellite that revolves 
around the Earth?’ (The Moon is a satellite that revolves around the Earth.)
Divide the students into groups of  two or three and provide each group with satellite 
pictures of  the Earth. The pictures can be printed from the following sites:
 Ø http://visibleearth.nasa.gov/view_cat.php?categoryID=1484
 Ø http://www .earth-images.com/index3.htm
 Ø http://jtintle.wordpress.com/2005/12/07/europe-at-night/
Share
Conduct a class discussion using the following question. Write students’ responses on 
the board.
After looking at the pictures, ask the students, ‘Why does the Earth seem flat in 
these pictures?’
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
192
Take a few responses from the students, and incorporating these responses as much 
as possible, tell the students that because we are viewing the Earth on a flat computer 
screen or a flat sheet of  paper, the Earth looks flat. That is why many satellite pictures 
of  the Earth from different angles are required to confirm that Earth is a sphere and 
not a flat disc.
Putting it all together
Now students will put all the evidence together that points to the fact that Earth is a 
sphere. Draw the following table on the blackboard and ask the students to look at 
their observations from Exploration 1 and Exploration 2.
Ask the students to make a similar table in their science notebooks.
Tell the students that the table will help them organize their data in a concise manner.
Observations Fact
Ship sailing away and disappearing graduallyEarth is a sphere
Satellite pictures
NOTE: Only a few observations are listed here as an example. The table needs to be 
completed using the observations from Explorations 1 and 2. The number of rows in the 
table is not representative of the number of observations. 
Culminating activity
Ask the students to draw and/or write about three new things they learned in this lesson.
The students should note at least one fact they learned from the textbook reading 
assigned to them as homework and describe if  that fact was clarified or not at the end 
of  this lesson. 
Go over the formative assessment responses with the students. Ask a few students to 
volunteer their responses and make any corrections if  needed. Ask the whole class to 
check their formative assessment responses against the correct responses and make 
any corrections if  needed. 
Collect students’ science notebooks to check their responses to formative assessment 
activities and to note if  all the students are self-checking their answers and making 
appropriate corrections. 
In the next lesson they will learn about how the Earth moves. Ask the students to 
read chapter 10, sections 10.2 and 10.4, on pages 90 and 91 from the grade 4 science 
textbook to prepare.
193
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Lesson 4: Movements of the Earth
Learning objectives
Students will:
•	 understand that the Earth moves around itself  and around the Sun
•	 be able to define the rotation and revolution of  the Earth
•	 be able to differentiate between the concepts of  rotation and revolution 
•	 understand that the Earth spins around itself  (on its axis)
•	 understand that the Earth’s axis is an imaginary line drawn through the Earth’s 
centre to represent its tilt and movement
•	 know the time it takes the Earth to complete a rotation and a revolution.
Learning targets
Students will:
•	 understand that the Earth moves around itself  and around the Sun
•	 be able to define the rotation and revolution of  the Earth
•	 understand that the Earth’s axis is an imaginary line drawn through the Earth’s  
 centre to represent its tilt and movement.
Success criteria
Students will:
•	 draw the diagram of  the Sun and the Earth with arrows indicating the   
 movements of  the Earth
•	 define the Earth’s axis in their own words and label it in the same diagram 
•	 write one example of  rotation and one of  revolution from their daily lives and describe 
why she or he thinks these movements are examples of  rotation and revolution.
Vocabulary
rotation, revolution, axis
Advanced preparation
Print copies of  pictures of  the Earth’s axis (provided in this lesson plan).
Materials required
•	 Internet connection
•	 Video projector
•	 Computer
•	 Printed pictures of  the Earth’s axis 
•	 Chart paper 
•	 Markers
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
194
Introduction (connections to prior knowledge)
Initiate a discussion to find out what students already know about the movements of  
the Earth. Ask the students to make predictions about the following guiding questions.
Guiding questions
•	 Do you think the Earth moves?
•	 How does it move?
¡¡ The Earth spins around itself  and moves around the Sun at the same time.
•	 When the Earth spins, what is that movement called? 
•	 When the Earth moves around the Sun, what is that movement called?
Note student replies on a large piece of  chart paper and refer to this later in this lesson 
or the unit. If  no one has provided correct responses to the questions, do not provide 
the students with the correct answers at this point.
Exploration 1
During this activity , students will understand the movement patterns of  the Earth.
Show the students a video on movements of  the Earth, ‘Rotation and Revolution of  
the Earth’, and ask them to note their observations. The video can be found at: 
 Ø http://www .youtube.com/watch?v=eV4nk9or9SE&feature=fvst
NOTE: Only shows the first 2 minutes and 47 seconds of the video.
Tell the students to keep the following questions in mind when making their observations:
•	 Does the Earth spin around itself ? What is that movement called?
•	 Does the Earth spin around the Sun? What is that movement called? 
•	 Does it take longer for the Earth to spin around itself  or to go around the Sun?
•	 What are at least two interesting facts about the Earth that you learned from   
 this video?
Notes 
This video features the following concepts:
•	 The video starts by defining the concepts of  rotation and revolution of  the Earth.
•	 The video then explains how the Earth rotates around itself  and revolves   
 around the Sun.
•	 It takes the Earth more time to revolve around the Sun and less time to rotate  
 around itself.
At this point, tell the students that ‘even though this video does not show it, scientists, 
in order to understand the rotation of  the Earth, draw an imaginary line through the 
centre of  the Earth. This line passes from the North Pole to the South Pole and is 
called the Earth’s axis’.
195
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Draw a picture of  the Earth with its axis and arrows for rotation to show the students.
Formative assessment: Tell the students to carefully observe the picture of  the Earth 
with its axis and arrows for rotation. Ask them to describe the axis of  the Earth in 
their own words and to write and draw the descriptions in their science notebooks.
Sharing
Tell the students, ‘Now it is time to share what we learned from the video and the picture’.
Pick a few volunteers from the class and ask them to share their observations of  the 
video with the rest of  the class. Note these responses on the chart paper.
Guiding questions
Conduct a class discussion to give students a chance to share their observations about 
the movements of  the Earth with their classmates. Use the following questions to 
guide the class discussion:
•	 Does the Earth spin around itself ? What is that motion called?
•	 Can anyone define the axis of  the Earth? Is it real? Why is it useful?
•	 Does the Earth move around the Sun? What is that motion called?
•	 Does anyone remember from lesson 1 what the path of  the Earth around the   
 Sun is called?
•	 Which movement takes Earth longer: rotation or revolution?
Bring out the chart paper from the introduction activity and show the students if  and how 
their answers to the guiding questions might have changed after watching the video.
Ask the students to note the observations from the video in their science notebooks.
Exploration 2
In this activity , students will make a human model of  the rotation and revolution of  
the Earth.
Divide the class into groups of  three students and ask the students to pick a Sun, an 
Earth, and a narrator in their groups. The role of  the narrator is to describe the model 
to the rest of  the class.
Give groups about five minutes to put together and act out their rotations and 
revolutions of  the Earth.
Call each group one by one to the front of  the class to present their model. Observe if  
the students are depicting these movements correctly .
Ask the students to write about their reactions and observations of  the models.
Formative assessment: Ask the students to write one example of  rotation and one of  
revolution from their daily lives and describe why these movements are examples of  
rotation and revolution.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
196
Share
Initiate a classroom discussion to give students a chance to share their experiences and 
observations from their own as well as their peers’ presentations. Use the following 
guiding questions.
Note student responses on the board and ask them to write them in their notebooks.
Guiding questions
•	 How is the Earth’s rotation different from the Earth’s revolution?
•	 What is the shape of  the Earth’s orbit? (One is oval, and one is elliptical.)
•	 What natural phenomenon does the Earth’s rotation cause? (Day and night.)
•	 What natural phenomenon is the Earth’s revolution related to? (The seasons.)
Culminating activity
Formative assessment: Ask the students to draw a diagram of  the Sun and Earth 
with arrows indicating movements of  the Earth. The students should also draw and 
label the Earth’s axis.
Ask the students to write or draw two new things that they learned in this lesson. 
Tell the students that one of  these facts should be from the textbook. Ask the students 
to describe if  knowledge of  this fact from the textbook reading was clarified or not by 
the end of  this lesson. 
NOTE: The purpose of this step is to examine how students connect the knowledge they 
learned from the textbook to the in-class lesson.
Go over the responses to formative assessment activities with the students. Ask a few 
students to volunteer their responses and make any corrections if  needed. Ask the 
class to check responses and make any corrections if  needed. 
Tell the students that in the next lesson they will explore day and night, and leave 
them with the question, ‘What do you think causes day and night?’
Ask the students to read chapter 10, section 10.3 on page 90 from the grade 4 
science textbook.
Lesson 5: Day and night
Learning objectives
Students will:
•	 understand the process by which day and night occurs
•	 be able to explain the role of  the Sun in creating day and night
•	 be able to explain the role of  the Earth’s rotation in creating day and night.
197
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Learning targets
Students will:
•	 be able to explain the role of  the Sun in creating day and night
•	 be able to explain the role of  the Earth’s rotation in creating day and night.
Success criteria
Students will write an explanation (in their own words) about how the Sun’s light and 
the Earth’s rotation around its own axis create day and night.
Vocabulary
rotation, revolution, Earth’s axis
Materials required
•	 Globe
•	 Small-sized sticker
•	 Torch
•	 Lamp (without the cover) 
•	 Styrofoam ball 
•	 Three index cards
Introduction (connections to prior knowledge)
Start this section with a demonstration of  night and day by using a globe.
Gather all the students around a desk and bring out a globe. Ask the students to make 
predictions about what the globe represents (the Earth.)
Ask the students if  they can find their location on the globe, and then put a small 
sticker on it. 
Turn off  all the lights in the classroom and shine a light on the globe. Ask the students 
to make predictions about what the torch represents. 
If  needed, provide the students with a hint by asking them the following question: 
‘Which object in the solar system provides the Earth with light? Think back to the first 
lesson in this unit’. (The Sun.)
Shine the torch directly onto the sticker indicating the city in which the school is located, 
and ask the students if  this demonstration represents day or night in their city . (Day .)
Ask the students, ‘Explain why the demonstration at this point represents day?’ 
(Because our location is directly facing the sunlight.) 
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
198
Spin the globe to the other side and ask the students, ‘Now , is it day or night at our 
location (according to the demonstration)?’ (Night.)
Ask the students, ‘Please explain why the demonstration now represents night?’ (Because 
our location is facing away from the Sun, and it is not receiving any direct sunlight.)
Initiate a discussion to check for students’ understanding of  Earth’s rotation and 
revolution and day and night. Ask the students to make predictions about the 
following questions.
Guiding questions
•	 What provides us with light during the day? (The Sun.)
•	 When an object spins around itself, what is that movement called? (Rotation.)
•	 Does the Earth rotate? (Yes.) 
•	 Around what does the Earth rotate? (Around its own axis.)
•	 When an object moves around another object, what is that movement called? 
(Revolution.)
•	 Does the Earth revolve? Around what does it revolve? (The Earth revolves 
around the Sun.)
•	 Can anyone explain why , during the demonstration, our location first faced 
toward the Sun and then away? In this case, we moved the globe by hand, but 
does that occur in real life? How does it occur?
¡¡ Because the Earth spins around itself  while revolving around the Sun, our 
location is sometimes in front of  the Sun (that is, in direct sunlight; day) and 
at other times away from the Sun (night).
¡¡ The movement of  the Earth moves our location to different points in 
reference to the Sun’s position.
After the discussion, ask the students to think about the question posed during the 
culminating activity of  the previous lesson: ‘What do you think causes day and night?’
Ask the students to write as well as draw their observations from the demonstration. 
(Ask the students to also keep the previous lesson about the movement of  the Earth in 
mind while writing and drawing their responses.)
Exploration
In this activity , students will learn about the causes of  day and night.
Divide the class into groups of  three students and give each group the materials (a 
lamp, a Styrofoam ball, and two index cards labelled ‘Sun’ and ‘Earth’).
Tell the students that they will demonstrate the Earth’s movements in relation to the position 
of  the Sun, and that each group will share their demonstration with the rest of  the class.
Tell the students that in each group one of  them should represent the Sun, one should 
represent the Earth, and one should be the narrator.
199
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Ask the students to draw a diagram of  the phenomenon (the Earth’s movements in 
relation to the position of  the Sun) before acting it out.
Before working on their demonstration, ask students to make predictions about 
the following:
•	 What does the lamp represent? (The Sun.)
•	 What does the Styrofoam ball represent? (The Earth.)
•	 Which object rotates around its axis? (The Earth.)
•	 Which object revolves? (The Earth revolves around the Sun.)
Ask a few volunteers from the class to share their responses with the rest of  the class.
Give the groups some time to put together their demonstrations, and during this time 
go around the classroom to check on every group.
Share
Ask each group to present their demonstration to the class.
Provide feedback to each group at the end of  their presentation.
Initiate a class discussion to give students a chance to share their observations of  their as 
well as their peers’ presentations. Use the following questions to guide the discussion.
Guiding questions
•	 What are some of  the limitations of  your demonstrations? (Think back to   
 lesson 2, where we studied scale models.)
¡¡ One limitation of  these models is that they are not to scale. The ratio 
between the sizes of  the Earth and the Sun are not true to size.
¡¡ The distances between the Earth and the Sun are also not represented to 
size.
¡¡ Also, the time it takes for the Earth to complete a rotation and revolution is 
not correct.
•	 Does anyone know how long it takes for the Earth to rotate around itself ?   
 (Twenty-four hours.)
•	 What is another term for this time period? (One complete calendar day .)
¡¡ One complete rotation of  the Earth around its axis takes 24 hours and   
 makes one complete day .
•	 Do all of  us living on Earth experience day or night at the same time? (No.)
•	 Why? 
¡¡ The Earth is constantly rotating around its axis, and so all regions on the 
Earth are not in front of  the Sun at the same time. Due to the constant 
rotation of  the Earth, different regions experience sunlight at different 
angles (in different amounts) at any point in time.
•	 How long does it take the Earth to orbit around the Sun? (One year: 365 days.)
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
200
Culminating activity
Tell the students that the rotation of  the Earth around its axis while revolving around 
the Sun causes day and night in different time zones because different regions on 
Earth receive different amounts of  light at any point in time.
Ask the students to take a few minutes to write in their science notebooks about what they 
have learned about the occurrence of  day and night. This account should include the role 
of  the Sun and the rotation of  the Earth around its axis in causing day and night.
Students should include at least one fact about the occurrence of  day and night that 
they learned from their textbook.
Ask the students to explain if  their textbook reading about the occurrence of  day and 
night was clarified or not after lesson. The students can also comment on how their 
textbook reading about the occurrence of  day and night was enhanced and what (if  
any) confusion still remains after the lesson.
Ask the students to trade their science notebook with another student sitting next to them. 
After they have traded their notebooks, each student will check the formative 
assessment responses of  their peers.
Ask a few students to volunteer their responses to the formative assessment activities 
and make any corrections if  needed.
Ask the students to check their peers’ formative assessment responses and correct 
them if  needed. 
Tell the students that in the next lesson they will learn about the occurrence of  the 
seasons. Ask them to read chapter 10, section 10.5, on page 93 from their science textbook.
Reference: teachHouston, University of  Houston. Retrieved 29 April, 2012.
 Ø http://teachhouston.uh.edu/TeachHouston_document/lesson_plans1/
sciencelesson/files/Day%20and%20Night-Final_5-21-10.pdf
Lesson 6: Reason for seasons
Learning objectives
Students will:
•	 understand that the Earth rotates around itself  on an axis
•	 understand the concepts of  the southern hemisphere, northern hemisphere, 
and equator
•	 know that the axis of  the Earth is tilted
•	 comprehend that the tilt in the Earth’s axis causes different hemispheres of  the 
Earth to experience different seasons.
201
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Learning targets
Students will:
•	 know the axis of  the Earth is tilted
•	 understand the concepts of  the southern hemisphere, northern hemisphere, 
and equator
•	 comprehend that the tilt in the Earth’s axis causes different hemispheres of  the 
Earth to experience different seasons.
Success criteria
Students will:
•	 draw a labelled diagram of  the Sun and the Earth showing the tilt in the Earth’s 
axis, the northern hemisphere, the southern hemisphere, and the equator
•	 write in their own words or draw an explanation about how the permanent tilt 
in the Earth’s axis and its revolution around the Sun cause the seasons
•	 explain why different hemispheres experience different seasons at any given time.
Vocabulary
Earth’s axis, tilt, northern hemisphere, southern hemisphere, Earth’s equator
Materials required
•	 Computer with an Internet connection 
•	 Globe 
•	 Lamp without shade
Introduction (connections to prior knowledge)
In this section, check for students’ knowledge of  concepts (northern hemisphere, 
southern hemisphere, and equator) that are necessary for understanding this lesson. 
Use this time to connect previous lessons learned to concepts in this lesson. 
Initiate a discussion to check students’ understanding of  background concepts for this lesson. 
Ask the students about the following and note their responses.
Guiding questions
•	 Can we remember from our previous lesson what the axis of  the Earth is? 
¡¡ It is an imaginary line going through the centre of  the Earth. The Earth   
 rotates around its axis.
•	 How long does it take the Earth to complete a rotation on its own axis? 
(Twenty-four hours.)
•	 What causes day and night? (The Earth’s rotation on its axis.)
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
202
•	 Can anyone tell us about the position of  the Earth’s axis? Is it straight or tilted 
at an angle? 
¡¡ The students might not know the answer to this question. After taking a 
few responses from the students, share with them that the axis of  the Earth 
is not straight. It is tilted slightly at an angle of  about 23.5 degrees. Tell the 
students this concept is very important for today’s lesson and we will explore 
it later in the lesson.
¡¡ Bring a globe for demonstration to show the students how the Earth’s axis 
is tilted. 
NOTE: Students should understand that the Earth’s axis is an imaginary line and that there 
is no actual line going through the Earth. We use the imaginary axis to help us calculate 
the tilt in the Earth’s position. 
Formative assessment
Ask the students to draw a labelled diagram of  the Sun and the Earth with its 
axis. The diagram should also show the equator, the northern hemisphere, and 
the southern hemisphere. You may need to explain the northern and southern 
hemispheres and the equator.
(Note: Students’ diagrams should show the 23.5-degree tilt in Earth’s axis.)
•	 What are seasons?
•	 What causes seasons? 
¡¡ A common misconception: Many students think that the seasons are caused 
by the distance of  the Earth from the Sun; that is, they believe that when the 
Earth is farther away from the Sun it is winter, and when it is closer to the 
Sun, it is summer.
¡¡ To clarify this misconception, ask the students if  all parts of  the Earth 
experience winter and summer at the same time. The answer is no, and 
this is proof  for the fact that the summer and winter are not caused by 
the distance of  Earth from the Sun. When it is winter in the northern 
hemisphere, it is summer in the southern hemisphere, and vice versa. If  
seasons changed because of  the distance of  the Earth from the Sun, both 
hemispheres would experience summer and winter at the same time.
Note the students’ responses on the board. These responses will be very important in 
assessing how much the students know about the seasons.
Tell the students that in this lesson we will explore the causes of  the different seasons.
Exploration 1
Tell students that during this activity , they will explore how the Earth’s tilted axis and 
the Earth’s revolution around the Sun cause the change in seasons.
During this activity , students will watch a video animation of  what causes seasons to change.
Draw a round circle (Earth) on a board and then draw a line across the middle to 
show the equator. 
Check for students’ knowledge of  some concepts necessary for understanding the 
causes of  the seasons. 
203
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Guiding questions
Ask students the following questions to lead the discussion. Point to the diagram of  
the Earth and ask the following questions:
•	 What is the equator? (It is an imaginary line drawn across the middle of  the 
globe that divides the Earth into the northern and southern hemispheres.)
•	 What is a hemisphere? (Hemisphere in Greek means ‘half  of  a sphere’, so a 
hemisphere of  Earth is half  of  the Earth.)
•	 Can anyone name the two hemispheres? (The northern hemisphere and the southern 
hemisphere. The northern hemisphere is the half  of  the Earth north of  the equator, 
and the southern hemisphere is the half  of  the Earth south of  the equator.)
Label the diagram of  the Earth as the definitions come up during the discussion.
After the discussion is over, show the students the video ‘Science for Kids: How Do 
Seasons Change?’ The video can be found at:
 Ø http://www .videojug.com/film/why-does-the-earth-have-seasons
After viewing the video, ask the students to take a few minutes to write down their 
observations and reactions to the video. 
Ask the students to write down at least two interesting things they remember from 
the video.
Share
Initiate a discussion in which students share what they learned from the video. 
Ask students to share at least one interesting fact they learned from the video. Take a 
few responses and note them on the board. 
Clarify any further misconceptions the students might have about the concepts from 
the video.
Initiate a class discussion to give the students a chance to share their observations 
about the video with their peers and use the following guiding questions to conduct 
the classroom discussion.
Guiding questions
•	 Is the Earth’s axis straight? (No, it is tilted at about 23.5 degrees.)
•	 How does the tilt in the Earth’s axis affect the sunlight hitting the Earth? 
¡¡ Because of  the tilt, the sunlight hits the Earth at different angles, and so   
 different parts of  the Earth receive different amounts of  sunlight.
•	 How does the tilt cause changes in the seasons on Earth? 
¡¡ During Earth’s revolution around the Sun, its tilt (direction of  the axis) 
always points in the same direction. When Earth is at one place in its path, 
the northern hemisphere faces more direct sunlight as compared to the 
southern hemisphere, and when the Earth moves to the opposite location, 
the other hemisphere receives more direct sunlight. The hemisphere that 
faces more sunlight experiences summer and the other experiences winter.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
204
Note the responses to these questions on the board. Ask the students to note their as 
well as their peers’ observations in their science notebooks.
Exploration 2
Start this exploration by asking the students to make predictions about the following 
questions and write their responses on the board.
•	 How do we know when seasons change? (We see flowers bloom, birds migrate,  
 and we experience hot or cold temperatures.) 
•	 How does the weather change in different seasons?
•	 Why do seasons change? 
Ask the students to describe the hottest day they can remember. Take the responses 
from a few students and note them on the board.
Ask the students to describe the coldest day they can remember. Take responses from 
a few students and note them on the board. 
Divide the students into groups of  three or four and provide each group with 
materials (lamp without a shade, a globe, and a small sticker).
Turn off  the classroom light and ask the students to turn on their lamps.
Help the groups to locate their town on the map and ask them to place a small 
sticker on it. 
Fix a marker in the classroom (such as a picture, a flagpole, etc.). Make sure the axes 
of  all the globes point toward this marker at all times during this activity . This will 
help students simulate the fact that the direction of  the Earth’s axis never changes.
Ask the students, ‘Why do we have the axes of  all the globes pointing toward this marker?’
NOTE: Students should understand that the Earth’s axis always points in the same direction. 
Go around the class to make sure that the students are performing this step correctly .
Ask the students to tilt the globe so that the sticker faces the lamp. 
Instruct the students to make sure that the tilt of  the globe is always facing toward the 
marker (in the same direction) at all times during this activity .
Ask the students, ‘What season is it in the northern hemisphere?’ It is summer 
because the northern hemisphere is facing the Sun and receiving the maximum 
amount of  sunlight. The maximum exposure to sunlight is causing the northern 
hemisphere to heat up more than the southern hemisphere.
Ask the group to slowly rotate the globe around its axis (while the Earth’s axis points 
toward the marker in the classroom at all times) and observe the northern hemisphere as 
the day goes by . Direct the students to note their observations in their science notebooks. 
205
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Even though the northern hemisphere (the top half  of  the Earth) experiences day and 
night (due to rotation of  the Earth around its own axis), it experiences more sunlight 
during the day because at that point in the Earth’s orbit around the Sun, it is tilted 
toward the Sun and so receives more direct sunlight.
Show the students the diagram on the following website to explain the concept further:
 Ø http://scienceforkids.kidipede.com/physics/weather/seasons.htm
NOTE: The person in the diagram is located on the northern hemisphere and seasons 
listed on the diagram refer to the northern hemisphere (the location specifically indicated 
by the human figure).
Tell the students that one of  the students in the group (while holding the globe and 
keeping the tilt of  the axis in the same direction) should go around the lamp (the Sun) 
and stop at the opposite location (on the other side of  the lamp). In this position, the 
southern hemisphere of  the globe should be facing the lamp.
Ask the students, ‘What season is it in the northern hemisphere now? Why?’ It is 
winter because now the northern hemisphere is facing away from the Sun, and so it is 
not receiving direct sunlight, which causes it to remain cool.
At the end of  the activity , to clarify the importance of  the Earth’s tilt in creating 
seasons, tell the students, ‘Now we are going to model what would happen if  the 
Earth was not tilted’. Ask the students to note their predictions about what would 
happen if  the Earth’s axis were straight. 
Ask the groups to straighten their globes and while holding them revolve around the 
lamp to test their predictions.
Students should write or draw their predictions and observations in their science notebooks.
Share
Initiate a class discussion to give students a chance to share their observations and 
predictions with their peers. Use the following questions to conduct the class discussion:
•	 What did you observe during this activity? Share at least one observation.
•	 What do you think would happen if  the Earth were not tilted? (We would not 
experience seasons because most of  the Earth would receive a similar amount 
of  light at all times.)
•	 During the experiment, why did we make sure the Earth’s axis was tilted and 
always pointed in the same direction? (In reality the Earth’s axis is tilted and 
always points in the same direction.)
•	 What is the angle of  the Earth’s tilt? (23.5 degrees.)
•	 Do all places on Earth experience the same season at the same time? (No.)
•	 Why? (Because of  the Earth’s tilt, when the northern hemisphere is facing the 
Sun, experiencing summer, the southern hemisphere is facing away from the 
Sun, experiencing winter. When it is summer in the northern hemisphere, it is 
winter in the southern hemisphere, and vice versa.)
•	 Why do we have different seasons?
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
206
Note the student responses on the board. Ask them to write their as well as their 
peers’ observations in their science notebooks.
Culminating activity
Formative assessment
Ask the students to explain in their own words the reason for the seasons and note 
it in their science notebooks. The explanation should include why the hemispheres 
experience different seasons at any given time. 
The students can write and/or draw their explanations. The explanation should 
include the role of  the permanent tilt in the Earth’s axis and the Earth’s revolution 
around the Sun in creating seasons.
Ask the students to write down if  their reading from the textbook about the 
occurrence of  seasons was clarified or not after the lesson. The students also can 
comment on how their reading from the textbook was enhanced by this lesson and 
what (if  any) unanswered questions still remain.
Ask the students to trade their science notebooks with a student sitting next to them. 
After they have exchanged their notebooks, each student will check the formative 
assessment responses of  their peers.
Ask a few students to volunteer their responses to the formative assessment activities 
and make any corrections if  needed.
Ask the students to check their peers’ formative assessment responses and correct 
them if  needed. 
Collect students’ science notebooks at the end of  the class to check:
•	 their written work
•	 their answers to formative assessments
•	 that the students are making necessary corrections to their formative   
 assessment responses during self-check and peer-check activities.
Reference: CASES, ‘What Causes Seasons?’ Retrieved 1 May , 2012 from:
 Ø http://cases.soe.umich.edu/plans.
php?nav=showplan&dqid=320&lpid=32774&printfriendly=yes&packet=n
207
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Lesson 7: Phases of the Moon
Learning objectives 
Students will:
•	 know that the Moon does not generate any light; it only reflects the light from the Sun
•	 learn that the Moon revolves around the Earth in a counter-clockwise fashion
•	 understand that the journey of  the Moon around the Earth is called a lunar, or 
Moon phase, cycle
•	 know that it takes the Moon approximately 28 days* to complete one lunar cycle
•	 learn that there are four major phases of  the Moon
•	 be familiar with the names of  the four major phases of  the Moon.
Learning targets
Students will:
•	 learn that the Moon revolves around the Earth in a counter-clockwise fashion
•	 understand that the journey of  the Moon around the Earth is called a lunar, 
or Moon phase, cycle, which takes approximately 28 days and represents one 
calendar month
•	 be familiar with the names of  the four major phases of  the Moon and the position 
of  the Moon in relation to the Earth and the Sun during these four phases.
Success criteria
Students will:
•	 draw a labelled diagram of  the Earth and Moon system and represent the 
direction of  the Moon’s movement with an arrow
•	 write the names of  four major lunar phases in correct order
•	 write an explanation of  the lunar cycle in their own words
•	 depict the position of  the Moon in relation to the Earth and Sun during each of  
the four lunar phases, in a Moon-phase book .
Vocabulary
crescent, first-quarter phase, full Moon phase, gibbous, lunar cycle, last-quarter phase, 
new Moon phase, waning, waxing
Materials required
•	 Styrofoam balls (one for each student)
•	 Lamp without a shade
* The time between two full moons 
(a Lunar cycle) is about 29.5 days. 
However, the time it takes the Moon 
to make one orbit around the Earth 
is about 27.5 days.  This difference 
is caused by the fact that the Earth-
Moon system is orbiting around the 
Sun at the same time the Moon is 
orbiting around the Earth. For sim -
plicity, this document talks about 
the lunar cycle and the Moon’s orbit 
around the Earth as if they are the 
same duration, approximately 28 days.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
208
Advance preparation
•	 A month before this lesson, ask students to take some time every evening to 
observe the Moon and draw the shape of  the Moon in their science notebooks. 
•	 Instruct the students to be sure to put the date on every Moon observation and 
continue the exercise for a month.
•	 If  the students are not able to see the Moon due to weather conditions, they 
should still put the date for that night and leave the observation section blank.
Introduction (connections to prior knowledge)
Initiate a discussion to find out what students already know about the Moon and its phases.
Ask the students to take out their science notebooks in which they made their Moon 
observations during the previous month.
Initiate the discussion by asking the students the following questions
Guiding questions
•	 What do you know about the Moon? 
¡¡ It revolves around the Earth. It takes a month, or approximately 28 days, to  
 complete a revolution around the Earth. 
•	 Does the Moon move? (Yes.)
•	 Around what does the Moon move? (It rotates around itself  and revolves 
around the Earth.)
•	 How long does it take the Moon to revolve around the Earth?  
(approximately 28 days.)
¡¡ A common misconception: Students might also say that the Moon emits light. 
Make sure to let students know that the Moon does not emit light, but rather 
it reflects the light of  the Sun and that is the reason we are able to see it.
•	 What did you see while drawing the Moon during the last month? (The Moon 
seemed to change its shape.)
•	 How does the Moon change its shape? (It seems to disappear and reappear. The 
shapes repeat after two weeks.)
•	 Why do you think the Moon changes it shape? 
¡¡ Students might not know the answer to this question, but it is a critical 
question in that it tells the teacher what students know about the phases of  
the Moon. 
Note the students’ responses on the board. 
Tell the students that this lesson will explore the phases of  the Moon and why they occur.
Exploration 1
The students will take a virtual trip to the Moon to observe what causes the phases of  
the Moon.
Show the students the following two videos.
209
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
The first video, ‘The Phases of  the Moon’, can be found at:
 Ø http://www .youtube.com/watch?v=0vXWXqGmPCk
This video explains that the phases of  the Moon are caused by its position relative to 
the Earth and the Sun. Because only one side of  the Moon is visible to us (because 
that side is lit up by the Sun), the portion of  the side of  the Moon that we can see 
depends upon the Moon’s position in its orbit around the Earth. In other words, 
because the Moon keeps moving in an elliptical path around the Earth, we on Earth 
can only see different portions of  the lit-up side of  the Moon.
Share
Initiate a discussion with the students to process the content they learned in the 
video and use the following questions to guide the classroom discussion. Note the 
student responses on the board and ask them to write down their own and their peers’ 
observations in their science notebooks.
Guiding questions
•	 How long does it take the Moon to revolve around the Earth and complete the 
cycle of  its phases, also called the lunar cycle? (approximately 28 days.)
•	 What causes the phases of  the Moon? (By the position of  the Moon relative to 
the position of  the Sun and the Earth.)
•	 Does the Sun light the entire Moon? (No, half  the Moon is always lit by the Sun, 
and that is the side of  the Moon that we can see from the Earth.)
•	 Can we see the entire lit-up side of  the Moon? 
¡¡ At one point in the Moon-phase cycle (the full Moon), we can see the entire 
lit-up side of  the Moon. At other times in the lunar cycle, we see portions of  
the lit-up side of  the Moon, and these portions depend on the position of  the 
Moon in its orbit around the Earth.
After the discussion, show the students the second video, ‘The Universe: The Phases 
of  the Moon’, which can be found at:
 Ø http://www .youtube.com/watch?v=WD-H1xqoAAg&feature=relmfu
This video also explains the phases of  the Moon and has a simple way of  naming the 
phases. Only show the first 2 minutes and 12 seconds of  this video.
Share
Initiate a discussion with the students to process the content they learned in the video 
and use the following questions to guide the classroom discussion. Note students’ 
responses on the board and ask them to write down their own and their peers’ 
observations in their science notebook.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
210
Guiding questions
•	 When none of  the lit-up side of  the Moon is visible from the Earth, what is the 
Moon’s position relative to the Earth and the Sun? (The Moon is between the 
Earth and the Sun.) 
•	 What is this phase called? (The ‘new Moon phase’ marks the beginning of  the 
lunar cycle.)
•	 How does the Moon move around the Earth? (Counter-clockwise.)
•	 When can we see the half  of  the lit-up side of  the Moon? 
¡¡ When the Moon starts to move counter-clockwise around the Sun, we can 
see more and more of  the Moon. When the Moon is at a right angle with 
the Earth and the Sun, we can see half  of  the lit-up side of  the Moon. At this 
point, the Moon has completed one-quarter of  its cycle.
•	 What is this phase called? (It is called the first-quarter phase.)
•	 When can we see a full lit-up side of  the Moon during the lunar cycle?
¡¡ When the Moon moves to a position where it is in a straight line again 
with the Earth and the Sun, we can see a full Moon. At this point, the the 
Earth is between the Sun and the Moon, and the Moon has completed one-
half  of  its cycle.
•	 What is this phase called? (It is called the full Moon phase.)
•	 When does the visible portion of  the lit-up side of  the Moon begin to decrease? 
(When the Moon moves past its half-cycle position.)
•	 Do we see half  the Moon again? 
¡¡ Yes. We see half  the Moon in the lunar cycle when the Moon is at a right 
angle again with the Sun and the Earth. At this point the lunar cycle is 
three-quarters complete. 
•	 What is this phase of  the Moon called? (This phase is called the last-quarter phase.)
•	 What happens to the Moon in the last part of  the lunar cycle?
¡¡ When the Moon is in the last part of  the lunar cycle, it appears to become 
smaller and smaller, until it is in line with the Sun and the Earth again (back 
at its starting position). At this point, we do not see the Moon. This is the 
new Moon phase.
•	 How long does it the Moon to go from one phase to another? (One week.)
•	 What does the Moon look like in between these phases? (Either a crescent 
Moon [less than half] or gibbous Moon [more than half].)
•	 What is the technical term that describes the Moon when it seems to be grow-
ing during the first half  of  its cycle? (Waxing.)
•	 When does the Moon seem to be waxing during its cycle? (During the first half  
of  the cycle.)
•	 What is the technical term that describes the Moon when it seems to be getting 
smaller and smaller? (Waning.)
•	 When does the Moon seem to be waning during its cycle? (During the last half  
of  its cycle.)
211
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Exploration 2
In this activity , students will model the Sun, Earth, and the Moon to observe how 
phases of  the Moon occur.
Place a light source (the lamp without a shade) in the middle of  the room.
Ask the students to make predictions about what the lamp represents. (The Sun.)
Turn off  the lights to darken the room so that the Moon phases are more visible.
Give each student a Styrofoam ball and ask them to make predictions about what the 
ball represents. (The Moon.)
Tell the students that their heads represent the Earth. 
Ask the students to take the Styrofoam ball and gather around the light source (the Sun).
Ask the students to model the new Moon position; that is, where the Moon is situated 
in relation to the Earth and Sun during the new Moon phase. (Between the Earth and 
the Sun.)
Go around the room to check all the students’ models.
Ask the students in which direction the Moon revolves around the Earth. 
(Counter-clockwise.) 
Tell the students to turn their bodies counter-clockwise to keep the Earth facing the 
Moon and stop once they have completed one-forth of  the lunar cycle. 
Ask the students to notice the edge of  the shadow moving across the Moon and to 
stop and draw the shadow at this point.
Tell the students to continue turning their bodies counter-clockwise until they have 
completed one-half  of  the revolution and the Sun is behind them. 
The students will have to raise the Moon (lift the ball up) so that the shadow of  their 
head does not interfere with the shadow cast on the Moon.
Ask the students to draw their observations of  the shadow on the Moon at this point.
Ask the students to continue their journey until they have completed three-quarters 
of  the revolution. The students should stop and note the appearance of  the Moon at 
this point in their science notebooks.
Ask the students to continue turning counter-clockwise until they have completed one 
full revolution (the lunar cycle) and note the appearance of  the Moon at this point in 
their notebooks.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
212
Share
Initiate a discussion to give students a chance to share their observations with their 
peers. Use the following questions to guide the class discussion.
Guiding questions
•	 What are some of  the limitations of  this model? 
¡¡ The model is not to size. Only the Earth is moving and the Moon is staying  
 stationary , but in reality both the Earth and the Moon are in motion.
•	 What does the very first phase (when the ball is between the student and the 
lamp) represent? (This represents the new Moon phase, when the Moon is 
between the Earth and Sun.)
•	 How much of  the Moon is visible during this phase? (None, and that is why 
there is no shadow on the ball.) 
•	 How much of  the shadow on the ball did we see after one-quarter revolution 
was complete? (One-half  shadow .)
•	 What is this phase called in the lunar cycle? (The first-quarter phase.)
•	 How much of  the shadow was seen after one-half  revolution was complete? 
(The whole ball was lit up.) 
•	 What is this phase called in the lunar cycle? (The full Moon phase.)
•	 How much of  the shadow did we see after three-quarters of  the lunar cycle was 
complete? (One-half  of  the Moon was lit up.)
•	 What is this phase called in the lunar cycle? (The last-quarter phase.)
•	 Between the new Moon phase and the full Moon phase, what was happening to 
the appearance of  the Moon? (It appeared to become bigger and bigger.)
•	 What is this phenomenon called? (The waxing phase.)
•	 What was happening to the appearance of  the Moon between the full Moon 
phase (going toward the end of  the revolution) and the new Moon phase? (The 
Moon appeared to become smaller and smaller.)
•	 What is this phenomenon called? (The waning phase.)
213
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Note student responses on the board. Ask the students to write down their own as 
well as their peers’ observations in their science notebooks.
Culminating activity
Ask the students to take a few minutes and write down what they learned about the 
Moon phases. What fascinated them about the phases of  the Moon? What questions 
do they still have about the lesson?
Formative assessment: Ask the students to draw a labelled diagram of  the Earth and 
the Moon system in their science notebooks and depict the direction of  the Moon’s 
movement with an arrow .
Ask the students to keep their science notebooks open and go over the formative 
assessments to give them a chance to correct their answers.
Ask a few students to share their responses and make any needed corrections. 
Ask the whole class to check their formative assessment responses and make any 
corrections if  need. 
Reference: Utah Education Network, ‘Phases of  the Moon’, 2002. Retrieved 6 May , 2012.
 Ø http://www .uen.org/Lessonplan/preview?LPid=623
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
214
Unit 2, week 4, session 2
Guide for using the Sun, Earth, and the 
Moon unit
Introduction to the unit
The ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’ is a seven-lesson science unit (for grades 4 to 5) that 
is written for the purpose of  teaching the assessment process. The major goal of  this 
unit is to teach Student Teachers about writing assessment plans into lesson plans and 
to showcase assessment and instruction as a continuous process.  
The format of  the lesson plans is one of  the many different formats that teachers 
follow to prepare their own lesson plans. An empty template for this lesson plan 
format accompanies this guide and the unit, and Student Teachers can use it for 
preparing their own lessons. Because this unit is written to teach about the interaction 
between assessment and instruction, it is more detailed than necessary for teaching a 
lesson on the solar system. When studying the lessons in the unit, Student Teachers 
should keep in mind that their lessons do not need to be as detailed as these lessons. 
Student Teachers should also keep in mind that when writing their own lesson and 
unit plans, they do not need to write or explain the definitions of  terms such as 
learning objectives, learning targets, success criteria, formative assessment, and culminating 
activity. Student Teachers should simply list and describe the learning objectives, 
learning targets, success criteria, formative assessments, and culminating activities for 
each lesson. 
Following are some of  the things included in these lessons that a teacher can omit 
from his or her own lesson plans:
•	 Detailed notes on advanced preparation. Teachers can include short reminders 
for themselves if  they would like.
•	 Notes. Notes are included in these lessons for guidance purposes and can be left 
out when writing regular lesson plans. Or teachers can include brief  reminders 
for themselves if  needed.
•	 Detailed notes on videos included in the lesson plans are not required. 
Instead, teachers can write short reminders about the contents of  the videos 
for themselves.
•	 Answers to the guiding questions or any other questions included in the lessons 
unless teachers need reminders for themselves.
F
215
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit snapshot (lessons and lesson learning objectives)
Lesson 1: Objects in the sky
•	 Students will understand that the universe is vast and has millions of  different 
types of  objects, including our solar system.
•	 Students will understand that the Sun is the centre of  our solar system, which 
has eight planets.
•	 Students will recognize the position of  the Sun, Earth, and its Moon in the 
solar system.
•	 Students will know that all the planets revolve around the Sun in a circular path.
•	 Students will know the meaning of  the word orbit and that paths of  the planets 
around the Sun are called orbits.
Lesson 2: How big, how far
•	 Students will understand the concept of  a scale model.
•	 Students will understand the relative size differences between the Sun, Earth, 
and the Moon.
•	 Students will be able to understand the relative distances between the Sun, 
Earth, and the Moon.
•	 Students will know that the Sun’s diameter is more than 100 times as big as the 
Earth’s diameter, and the Earth is about 100 Sun diameters away from the Sun.
•	 Students will understand that the Moon’s diameter is around one-fourth the 
size of  Earth’s diameter, and it is about 30 Earths away from the Earth.
Lesson 3: Endless Earth
•	 Students will be familiar with the concept of  spherical shapes.
•	 Students will understand that the Earth is a sphere.
•	 Students will be able to explain why they think that the Earth is a sphere.
•	 Students will be familiar with the discovery that the Earth is a sphere.
Lesson 4: Movements of the Earth
•	 Students will understand that the Earth moves around itself  and around the Sun.
•	 Students will be able to define the rotation and revolution of  the Earth.
•	 Students will be able to differentiate between the concepts of  rotation and revolution. 
•	 Students will understand that the Earth spins around itself  (on its axis).
•	 Students will understand that the Earth’s axis is an imaginary line drawn 
through the Earth’s centre to represent its tilt and movement.
•	 Student will know the time it takes the Earth to complete a rotation and a revolution.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
216
Lesson 5: Day and night
•	 Students will understand the process by which day and night occurs.
•	 Students will be able to explain the role of  the Sun in creating day and night.
•	 Students will be able to explain the role of  the Earth’s rotation in creating day 
and night.
Lesson 6: Reason for seasons
•	 Students will understand that the Earth rotates around itself  on an axis.
•	 Students will understand the concepts of  the southern hemisphere, northern 
hemisphere, and equator.
•	 Students will know that the axis of  the Earth is tilted.
•	 Students will comprehend that the tilt in the Earth’s axis causes different 
hemispheres of  the Earth to experience different seasons.
Lesson 7: Phases of the Moon 
•	 Students will know that the Moon does not generate any light; it only reflects 
the light from the Sun.
•	 Students will learn that the Moon revolves around the Earth in a counter-
clockwise fashion.
•	 Students will understand that the journey of  the Moon around the Earth is 
called a lunar, or Moon phase, cycle.
•	 Students will know that it takes the Moon approximately 28 days* to complete 
one lunar cycle.
•	 Student will learn that there are four major phases of  the Moon.
•	 Students will be familiar with the names of  the four major phases of  the Moon.
Learning objectives, learning targets, and success criteria
In this unit learning objectives represent the broader vision of  the lesson, and learning 
targets represent learning objectives that are essential to understanding the lesson and 
the whole unit. In other words, learning targets represent the main learning objectives 
of  a lesson and leave out the supporting learning objectives. Success criteria are written 
using action verbs and describe what a student should be able to do in order to show 
that she or he has mastered the learning targets for the lesson.
Formative assessment
Formative assessment involves collecting information about student learning while it is 
in progress so that students and the teacher can receive feedback and make changes 
in teaching strategies and learning tactics to increase learning. Formative assessments 
are spread out throughout the lessons. Even though most explorations and guiding 
questions serve as formative assessments for this unit, the sections especially marked 
as ‘formative assessment’ cover the success criteria of  the lessons. 
* The time between two full moons (a Lunar 
cycle) is about 29.5 days. However, the 
time it takes the Moon to make one orbit 
around the Earth is about 27.5 days. This 
difference is caused by the fact that the 
Earth-Moon system is orbiting around 
the Sun at the same time the Moon is 
orbiting around the Earth. For simplicity, 
this document talks about the lunar 
cycle and the Moon’s orbit around the 
Earth as if they are the same duration, 
approximately 28 days.
217
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Culminating activities and record-keeping
The culminating activity is at the end of  each session. It is specifically an assessment activity . 
At the end of  each culminating activity , the teacher leads a discussion that allows 
the students to either self-check or peer-check their responses to the formative 
assessments in that particular lesson. The teacher can alternate between self-checking 
or peer-checking throughout the unit. For the self-check or peer-check, the teacher 
picks a few volunteers from the class and asks them to share (write or draw on the 
board) their responses to formative assessments. After the students are done writing 
or drawing their responses, the teacher makes any corrections, if  needed. The 
corrections can be made by asking the students about the mistakes in the formative 
assessment responses written on the board. After all the correct answers are on the 
board, the students (if  self-checking) or their peers (if  peer-checking) check their 
answers and correct them, if  needed (see the culminating activity section at the end of  
each lesson).
This exercise can be very helpful for students as well as teachers. This exercise can 
help students understand and correct their mistakes and help the teachers keep 
accurate records of  each student’s performance in classroom lessons. The teachers 
should ask the students to make corrections in a different-coloured pen or pencil 
than first used so that they can track the student changes. This makes record-keeping 
easier for teachers. When the teachers collect students’ notebooks every two or three 
lessons, they can clearly see and note the areas where the students are struggling. 
This can also help students prepare for tests and quizzes by highlighting the areas and 
topics that need more time and attention.
Student T eachers’ task
The learning objectives, learning targets, success criteria, and formative assessments 
(pertaining only to success criteria) from lessons 2, 3, 5, and 6 have been omitted from 
the Student Teachers’ copy of  the unit. Student Teachers’ should use lessons 1, 4, and 
7 as examples to come up with learning objectives, learning targets, success criteria, 
and formative assessments (pertaining only to success criteria for lessons 2, 3, 5, and 6. 
The spaces for learning objectives, learning targets, and success criteria) are left blank. 
The Student Teachers’ task is to fill these spaces with appropriate learning objectives, 
learning targets, and success criteria to make these lessons look like lessons 1, 4, and 
7. They should come up with a minimum of  three and maximum of  five learning 
objectives, a minimum of  two and maximum of  four learning targets, and minimum of  
one and maximum of  three success criteria. 
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
218
The formative assessment activities are either not labelled or have been taken 
out from lessons 2, 3, 5, and 6. Student Teachers’ can either write new formative 
assessment activities or find those that are already built into the lessons. The 
assessment activities added to or identified in the lessons should aim at assessing 
students’ mastery of  the success criteria of  the lessons. Student Teachers should come 
up with at least two new formative assessment activities and choose at least two that 
are already embedded in the lesson plans. The Instructor can leave the decision of  
where to add new and where to identify the already built-in assessment activities to 
the Student Teachers’ discretion. 
When creating their own or identifying already-present formative assessment 
activities, Student Teachers should also include the following information:
•	 Write a new activity (in its appropriate place in the lesson) or underline and 
label the already-present formative assessment activity .
•	 Write which success criteria the assessment activity is measuring.
•	 Write how and why the formative assessment activity is well suited to measure 
that specific assessment criterion.
NOTE: These three tasks should be completed for each success criteria that Student 
T eachers have created for the lessons. Student T eachers should not have more than three 
success criteria for a lesson.
219
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 2, week 5, session 1
Forms for recording student participation 
in classroom discussions
Notes to faculty about the use of these forms
As the title indicates, this handout contains forms that enable a teacher to record 
student participation in classroom discussions. There are three forms. 
The first is a record of  participation. The form is a seating chart. Each square 
represents a desk. The initials, obviously , belong to the student who uses that desk. 
The teacher uses this form when she or he wants to know which students are 
participating in discussions and which students are silent. When a student participates, 
the teacher makes a tally on that student’s desk on the form and indicates whether the 
student was called upon by the teacher or initiated the response. 
A teacher uses the second form when he or she wants to know if  a student’s answer 
to a question by the teacher is relevant to the question or not. The teacher notes the 
student’s response and then codes it as relevant (CR), semi-relevant (SR), or irrelevant 
(IR). The numbers indicate the order in which the answers were given, which matches 
the order in which the questions are listed in the teacher’s lesson plan. This allows the 
teacher to check if  irrelevant answers are a signal that the question was vague.   
The third form is used to record a student’s question. These student questions are 
coded as clarifying (C), fact-based (F), or open (O).
Participation in classroom discussions is usually an indication of  a student’s 
knowledge about and interest in the topic. It is important for a teacher to know who 
is participating and who is not. It is very hard for a teacher to remember student 
participation at the same time she or he is keeping the discussion focused on the topic. 
For these reasons, records of  student participation in discussion are important.
Suggestions for using the forms in a college or university class:
•	 Lead Student Teachers through a discussion to acknowledge the importance of  
record-keeping during a class discussion.
•	 Make sure they understand the way the three forms are used.
•	 Taking each form separately , ask them what they might learn from the form 
and what decisions about instruction they might make.
•	 Lead them to talk about improvements in the forms.
F S
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
220
Forms for recording student participation in  
classroom discussions
Discussion recording form 1: Recording student responses
Directions 
First, record students’ names on this chart. During classroom discussion, record the 
number of  times the students answer questions. Place a tally mark to signify student 
participation in discussion. Record whether you called on the student to relay a 
response or the student raised their hand to participate. 
Code 
T: Teacher called on the student
S: Self-initiated 
Front of room
A.A.
I 
T
C.A.
IIII
S
K.H. M.H.
II
T
A.H.
L.K.
III
T
U.K. Z.K.
II
T
M.K.
II
T
A.K.
I
T
P .K. M.M. L.M.
I
T
F .M. M.M.
I
T
I
S
O.M. P .M.
I
T
N.N. M.N.
I
S
P. N .
Z.N. F. T. P. T.
I
S
Q. T. S . T.
T. T. A.W . C.W . Z.W .
221
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Discussion recording form 2: Recording the relevance of 
student answers
Directions
This form can be used to document the relevance of  student responses to questions 
you ask. First, number and code the type of  question you ask in the box labelled 
‘questions asked’. Next, instead of  using a tally mark to record student responses, use 
the codes listed below to record. If  time permits, jot down a few notes as well. This 
information will help you to clarify misunderstandings and may provide you with a 
general gauge of  the range of  student knowledge in the classroom.  
Questions asked
Codes: F: Fact-based question; O: Open-ended question* 
Code 
CR: Correct or relevant response
SR: Semi-relevant response
IR: Irrelevant/incorrect response 
The numbers signify the order in which the questions were asked. 
Front of room
A.A.
1.
CR
C.A.
2.
CR
K.H. M.H.
14.
CR
A.H.
13.
CR
L.K.
15.
SR
U.K.
16.
SR
Z.K. M.K.
3.
CR
A.K.
4.
CR
P .K.
6.
SR
M.M. L.M. F .M.
5.
CR
M.M.
12.
CR
O.M. P .M.
7.
IR
N.M. N.M.
9.
IR
P. N .
8.
SR
Z.N. F. T. P. T.
10.
IR
Q. T. S . T.
T. T. A.W .
11.
IR
C.W . Z.W . Examples of clarifying questions: ‘How 
much larger is the Sun’s diameter than 
the Earth’s diameter? What about the 
comparison between the Moon’s and 
the Earth’s diameters?’
These are considered clarifying questions 
because the information they request 
has been presented and discussed in a 
previous class discussion.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
222
Discussion recording form 3: Recording student initiation  
of questions 
Directions 
This form can be used to record the type of  student responses, student initiation of  
questions, and types of  questions students ask. Use the codes listed to help you assess 
the discussion patterns in your classroom. This information will help you assess 
content knowledge as well as the extent to which the classroom climate encourages 
students to ask questions. 
Code 
C: Clarifying question* 
F: Fact-based question
O: Open-ended question 
Front of room
A.A.
C
C.A.
FCF
K.H.
C
M.H. A.H.
L.K. U.K. Z.K. M.K.
F
A.K.
P .K. M.M.
C
L.M. F .M. M.M.
C
O.M. P .M. N.M.
F
N.M. P. N .
Z.N. F. T. P. T. Q. T. S . T.
O
Examples of clarifying questions: ‘How 
much larger is the Sun’s diameter than 
the Earth’s diameter? What about the 
comparison between the Moon’s and 
the Earth’s diameters?’
These are considered clarifying questions 
because the information they request 
has been presented and discussed in a 
previous class discussion.
223
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 2, week 5, session 3
Grade 3 Mathematics in Pakistan’s 2006 
National Curriculum
Curriculum for mathematics—Grade III
Contents and scope Learning outcomes/skills
All students will be able to
Unit 1: Numbers
Contents and scope Learning outcomes/skills
1.1   Roman Numbers i)   Read Roman numbers up to 20.
ii)  Write Roman numbers up to 20.
1.2   Even and Odd Numbers i)   Identify even and odd numbers up to 99    
within a given sequence.
ii)  Write even or odd numbers within a given  
sequence.
1.3   Place Values Identify the place value of  numbers up to 
6 digits.
1.4    Numbers up to 100,000 Read and write given numbers up to 
100,000 (hundred thousand) in numerals 
and in words.
1.5   Comparing and Ordering the 
Numbers
i)   Compare two numbers using symbols ‘<’, 
‘>’ and ‘=’.
ii)  Write the given set of  numbers in ascending 
and descending order.
1.6   Number Line i)   Represent a given number on number line.
ii)  Identify the value of  a number from 
number line.
Unit 2: Number operations
Contents and scope Learning outcomes/skills
2.1   Addition i)   Add numbers up to four digits (with 
and without carrying) vertically and 
horizontally .
ii)  Add numbers up to 100 using mental 
calculation strategies.
iii) Solve real-life problems involving addition.
National Curriculum for Mathematics 
2006 – Grade III
S
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
224
Contents and scope Learning outcomes/skills
2.2   Subtraction i)   Subtract numbers up to four digits with 
and without borrowing.
ii)  Subtract numbers up to 100 using mental 
calculation strategies.
iii) Solve real-life problems involving 
subtraction.
2.3   Multiplication i)   Using the term ‘product’ for multiplication 
of  two numbers.
ii)  Develop multiplication tables for 6, 7, 8, and 9.
iii) Multiply 2-digit numbers by 1-digit numbers.
iv)  Multiply a number by zero.
v)   Apply mental mathematical strategies to 
multiply numbers up to the table of  10.
vi)  Solve real life problems involving 
multiplication of  2-digit numbers by 
1-digit numbers.
2.4   Division i)   Divide 2-digit numbers by 1-digit numbers 
(with zero remainder).
ii)  Apply mental mathematical strategies to 
divide numbers up to the table of  10.
iii) Solve real-life problems involving division 
of  2-digit numbers by 1-digit numbers.
Unit 3: Fractions
Contents and scope Learning outcomes/skills
3.1   Common Fractions i)   Express the fractions in figures and  
vice versa.
ii)  Match the fractions with related figures.
3.2   Equivalent Fractions i)   Identify equivalent fractions from the 
given figures.
ii)  Write three equivalent fractions for a given 
fraction.
3.3   Proper and Improper Fractions Differentiate between proper and 
improper fractions.
3.4   Comparing Fractions Compare fractions, with same denominators, 
using symbols ‘<’, ‘>’ and ‘=’.
3.5   Addition of  Fractions i)   Add two fractions with same 
denominators.
ii)  Represent addition of  fractions through 
figures.
225
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Contents and scope Learning outcomes/skills
3.6   Subtraction of  Fractions i)   Subtract fractions with same 
denominators.
ii)  Represent subtraction of  fractions through 
figures.
Unit 4: Measurement of length, mass, and capacity
Contents and scope Learning outcomes/skills
4.1 Length
4.1.1   Units of  Length
4.1.2   Addition of  Units of  
Length
4.1.3   Subtraction of  Units of  
Length
i)   Read standard units of  length (kilometre, 
metre and centimetre) including 
abbreviations.
ii)  Measure and write standard units of  length 
including abbreviations.
iii) Add measures of  length in same units with 
and without carrying.
iv)  Solve real-life problems involving same 
units of  length for addition with and 
without carrying.
v)   Subtract measures of  length in same units 
with and without borrowing.
vi) Solve real-life problems involving same 
units of  length for subtraction with and 
without borrowing.
4.2 Mass/Weight
4.2.1   Units of  Mass/Weight
4.2.2   Addition of  Units of  
Mass/Weight
4.2.3   Subtraction of  Units of  
Mass/Weight
i)   Read standard units of  mass/weight 
(kilogram and gram) including 
abbreviations.
ii)  Measure and write standard units of  mass/
weight including abbreviations.
iii)  Add measures of  mass/weight in same 
units with and without carrying.
iv)  Solve real-life problems involving same 
units of  mass/weight for addition with 
and without carrying.
v)   Subtract measures of  mass/weight in 
same units with and without borrowing.
vi)   Solve real-life problems involving same 
units of  mass/weight for subtraction with 
and without borrowing.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
226
Contents and scope Learning outcomes/skills
4.3 Volume/Capacity
4.3.1   Units of  Volume
4.3.2   Addition of  Units of  
Volume
4.3.3   Subtraction of  Units of  
Volume
i)   Read standard units of  volume (litre and 
millilitre) including abbreviations.
ii)  Measure and write standard units of  
volume including abbreviations.
iii)  Add measures of  volume in same units 
with and without carrying.
iv)  Solve real-life problems involving same 
units of  volume for addition with and 
without carrying.
v)  Subtract measures of  volume in same 
units with and without borrowing.
vi) Solve real-life problems involving same 
units of  volume for subtraction with and 
without borrowing.
Unit 5: Time
Contents and scope Learning outcomes/skills
5.1   Units of  Time i)   Use a.m. and p.m. to record time from 
12-hour clock.
ii)  Read and write time from analog and 
digital clocks.
iii)  Read and write days and dates from the 
calendar.
5.2   Addition of  Units of  Time i)   Add units of  time hours.
ii)  Solve real-life problems involving units of  
time for addition of  hours.
5.3   Subtraction of  Units of  Time i)   Subtract units of  time hours
ii)  Solve real-life problems involving 
subtraction of  units of  time in hours.
227
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 6: Geometry
Contents and scope Learning outcomes/skills
6.1   Geometrical Shapes i)   Recognize point, line segment, ray .
ii)  Classify figures according to number of  
sides as quadrilaterals (rectangles, squares) 
and triangles.
iii)  Identify circle, its radius and diameter.
6.2   Perimeters Calculate perimeters of  squares, 
rectangles and triangles.
Unit 7: Data representation
Contents and scope Learning outcomes/skills
7.1   Picture Graphs Read and interpret a picture graph.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
228
Unit 3, week 9, session 1
Performance-based assessment
This type of  assessment examines students’ competencies and skills by engaging them 
in hands-on tasks. The time required to conduct this type of  assessment varies and could 
last from one class period (short assessment) to a few weeks (extended assessment).
Example of short assessment 
Who has the best apples? 
Assessment duration: 3 to 4 class periods
Subject content: Science, math, and English
•	 Science: Knowledge of  mass and measuring mass
•	 Math: Knowledge of  circumference, measuring circumference, displaying   
 experimental data using bar graphs
•	 English: Spelling, grammar, and punctuation (in a letter)
Groupings: One student
Appropriate for: Class levels 4 to 5
Description 
The purpose of  this assessment task is to test students’ ability to find the mass (using a 
balance and mass pieces) and circumference of  an object and display the results using 
a bar graph. 
The students are told that they are acting as judges at an agricultural fair where four 
different apple growers are taking part in a challenge called ‘Who has grown the 
best apples?’ The students are given different parameters to judge the apples and are 
required to write a letter congratulating the winner of  the challenge and explaining 
why his apple was the winner.
The teacher gives each student the following prompt for the assessment task.
S
229
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Prompt
You are a judge at a local agricultural fair for an apple-growing contest. There are four 
apple growers participating in the contest, and your job is to decide which farmer has 
grown the best apples. You will be using following factors to judge the apples:
•	 Taste
•	 Mass
•	 Circumference
•	 Shape
You have already tasted all four apples and found them to be juicy and sweet. 
To decide which apple is the winner, you will have to rely on the apples’ mass, 
circumference, and shape.
You can tell the shape of  the apples by looking at them. Use a balance and mass pieces 
to find the mass of  the apples and a measuring tape to find the circumference. Record 
your results in your science notebook in a data chart.
To get a clear visual of  your results, display them using a bar graph. It is important 
to add labels so that your bar graphs are clear and easy to understand. Draw one bar 
graph that shows the comparison of  mass and another that shows the comparison of  
circumference of  the four apples. 
After you have displayed your results, decide which apple is the winner. Write a letter 
to the farmer to congratulate him and explain why his apple is the winner of  the 
contest. The letter should not be more than one page long.
Learning objective being assessed
•	 Students are able to use a balance to measure the mass of  an object accurately .
•	 Students are able to use a measuring tape to accurately measure the 
circumference of  an object. 
•	 Students are able to accurately analyse experimental data.
•	 Students are able to draw a bar graph to compare results of  an experiment.
NOTE: These learning objectives are not taken from any specific unit or curriculum. They are 
written in a general format to outline the topics assessed by ‘who has the best apples’ task.
Assessment tasks
During the project: Student data chart
During the project, the teacher assesses students on how well they are measuring the 
mass and circumference of  the apples. The teacher also judges students’ ability to 
note their observations in a data chart.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
230
The teacher can provide students with the following data chart for recording 
experimental results.
Taste Shape Mass 
(grams)
Circumference 
(centimetres)
Mr Khan’s apple Juicy and sweet
Mr Farooq’s 
apple
Juicy and sweet
Mr Noorani’s 
apple
Juicy and sweet
Mr Shah’s apple Juicy and sweet
At the end of the project: Two bar graphs
This task assesses students’ ability to display the result of  an experiment using bar graphs. 
At the end of the project: Letter to the farmer
This task tests students’ ability to apply logical reasoning skills and to communicate 
their reasoning in a clear and concise manner. 
Rubric for the project
Learning 
standards
Performance 
indicators
4 3 2 1
Can determine 
mass of  apples
Correctly 
measures mass 
of  all four 
apples in grams
Correctly 
measures mass 
of  three apples 
in grams
Correctly 
measures mass 
of  two apples 
in grams
Correctly 
measures mass 
of  one apple in 
grams
Can measure 
circumference 
of  apples
Correctly 
measures 
circumference 
of  all four 
apples in 
centimetres
Correctly 
measures 
circumference 
of  three apples 
in centimetres
Correctly 
measures 
circumference 
of  two apples 
in centimetres
Correctly 
measures 
circumference 
of  one apple in 
centimetres
Can analyse 
experimental 
data
Creates 
accurate bar 
graphs
Clearly labels 
the bar graphs
The bar graphs 
clearly show 
data
Creates bar 
graphs that 
do not have 
more than one 
minor mistake
Labels the bar 
graphs
The bar graphs 
show data but 
has one or two 
minor errors
Creates bar 
graphs with one 
critical mistake
Does not 
clearly label 
the bar graphs
The bar graphs 
show data 
but have one 
critical error
Creates bar 
graphs with 
more than one 
critical mistake 
Bar graphs are 
not labelled
The bar graphs 
do not display 
data correctly 
231
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Learning 
standards
Performance 
indicators
4 3 2 1
Can 
communicate 
experimental 
results
The letter 
clearly outlines 
at least three 
reasons for 
choosing a 
winner
The letter 
does not have 
any spelling, 
punctuation, 
or grammati-
cal mistakes
The letter 
outlines two 
clear reasons 
for choosing a 
winner
The letter 
has up to 
three spelling, 
punctuation, 
or grammatical 
mistakes
The letter 
contains one 
or two reasons 
for choosing 
a winner but 
lacks focus and 
is difficult to 
understand
The letter 
contains 
more than 
three spelling, 
punctuation, 
or grammatical 
mistakes 
The letter 
offers some 
reasons 
that are not 
relevant to 
picking a 
winner and 
completely 
lacks 
understanding 
on student’s 
part
The concept of  this activity was adapted from S. Strating, R. Mitchell, S. Mumm, 
and A. Martin, ‘What’s the “Matter” with Those Apples’, Northwest Missouri State 
University . Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .discoverycenter.org/curriculum/items/MatMap2.pdf
Example of extended assessment
The green bean competition
Assessment duration: 3 weeks
Subject content: Science, math, and English
•	 Science: Knowledge of  conditions for growing bean plants, parts of  a plant, 
functions of  different parts of  a plant, and the importance of  plants to our lives 
and the environment
•	 Math: Measuring bean plant length, presentation of  experimental results with 
charts
•	 English: Spelling, grammar, and punctuation (in notes, newsletter, and 
presentation); bean plant poems (optional)
Groupings: 4 or 5 students
Appropriate for: Classes 4 to 6
Background knowledge
The background knowledge needed to complete this challenge can be found at ‘The 
Green Bean Race’:
 Ø http://educate.intel.com/en/ProjectDesign/UnitPlanIndex/GreatBeanRace/
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
232
This challenge requires students to know about the following concepts:
•	 Parts of  a plant (at least three different parts)
•	 Functions of  parts of  a plant
•	 Knowledge of  conditions required for the growth of  a bean plant (at least   
 three conditions)
•	 Importance of  plants to our lives and the environment (at least three different roles)
The website listed above describes the conditions required for a bean plant to grow 
but does not review the parts of  a plant, functions of  the parts of  a plant, or the 
importance of  plants to our lives and the environment. These three topics are chosen 
for students’ independent research. The students should research these topics (using 
the Internet, library , or gardener/farmer interviews) to find the information and 
include it in their newsletter or PowerPoint presentation.  
After conducting their research, the students should find the following information.
The webpage ‘Part of  a Bean Plant’ describes different parts of  a bean plant in detail:
 Ø http://www .ehow .co.uk/list_7383883_parts-bean-plant.html
The video below shows a labelled diagram of  a bean seedling growing into a bean plant:
 Ø http://www .ehow .co.uk/list_7383883_parts-bean-plant.html
The webpage ‘Plants’ describes the importance of  plants to our lives and our environment:
 Ø http://www .globio.org/glossopedia/article.aspx?art_id=30
Description 
This assessment tests students’ knowledge of  plant growth processes, hypothesis 
development, experimental design, and analysing and reporting results by involving 
students in a plant growth contest. The challenge is to see which student group grows 
the tallest bean plant in three weeks.
The students learn about the conditions affecting plant growth during the unit and 
use that knowledge to grow their own bean plants. 
The teacher divides the class into groups of  four or five students. Each group comes 
up with a hypothesis of  how to grow the tallest bean plant and designs an experiment 
to test the hypothesis (the bean plan).
The PowerPoint presentation below is an example of  how teachers can introduce this 
assessment task to the class:
 Ø http://educate.intel.com/en/ProjectDesign/UnitPlanIndex/GreatBeanRace/
233
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
If  a teacher cannot review a PowerPoint presentation in the classroom, he or she can 
use the following directions to introduce the task to the students:
•	 During this task you will work in teams, and your team goal is to grow the 
tallest bean plant.
•	 The team who is able to grow the tallest bean plant in three weeks will win.
•	 After the contest, you will create a PowerPoint presentation or newsletter to 
share your experiments and the results.
NOTE: Because the challenge (assessment task) is introduced at the beginning of the 
instructional unit, it is important to remind students to take careful notes throughout the 
unit to use later during the assessment.
This competition will start at the end of  our instructional unit about plants. Take 
careful notes in your science journals about the ideal conditions to grow bean plants 
so you can use this knowledge later in your experiment.
At the beginning of  the contest, each team will be given the following materials:
•	 Two beans
•	 A polystyrene cup
•	 Soil (different types)
•	 Lid
Water (perhaps every day depending upon the team plan) and measure the length of  
your plant every other morning for three weeks to the nearest centimetre and record 
the results in your plant log.
At the end of  each week, compare your results with one other group and note the 
differences and similarities between the two plants in your science journal.
Come up with a hypothesis explaining these differences and similarities.
The teacher will collect your science journals every week to assess your daily and 
weekly entries. You will be assessed on the entire process of  growing a plant and 
recording data and not only the height of  the plant. 
At the end of  the contest, each group will create a newsletter or PowerPoint presentation 
to describe the hypothesis, plan, and results of  the experiment. 
This assessment is set up as a challenge. The student groups can compete against one 
another in the same classroom, with student groups from other classrooms or other 
schools in the area, across the country , or across the world. If  the teacher has access 
to the Internet, she or he can have the students connect with other classes across the 
country or the world via the Internet community ePals (www .epals.com). 
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
234
Learning objectives being assessed:
•	 Students are able to name different parts of  a plant.
•	 Students are able to explain functions of  different parts of  a plant.
•	 Students are able to explain the role of  plants in our lives and environment.
•	 Students are familiar with perfect conditions for growing a plant.
•	 Students are able to develop a testable hypothesis.
•	 Students are able to design an experiment to carry out the hypothesis.
•	 Students are able to draw conclusions and communicate the results after   
 conducting an experiment.
NOTE: These learning objectives are not taken from any specific unit or curriculum. They are 
written in a general format to outline the topics assessed by the ‘Green Bean Competition’.
Assessments tasks
Beginning of the project: Hypothesis and the bean plan
The teacher asks the student groups to develop a hypothesis and create a plan (the 
bean plan) to grow the tallest bean plant. The student groups should describe their 
experimental design (a plan of  how to grow the tallest bean plant) in their bean plan. 
Students write their group’s bean plan in their science notebooks. 
The teacher assesses the following:
•	 Student groups’ hypotheses of  how to grow the tallest bean plant
•	 Student groups’ bean plans (an experimental design to test student  
groups’ hypotheses)
During the project: Plant journals
In their plant journals, student groups should include the following from daily 
observations of  their plants:
•	 Plant growth (how much has the plant grown)
•	 Daily temperature
•	 Notes of  any additional observation
The teacher can use the following table for students’ results or create their own.
Group names:
Date Plant height Temperature
235
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
NOTE: The table is only an example, and the rows in the table do not represent the num-
ber of observations. 
Student groups need to make observations every day over three weeks. Each student 
needs to include the observations table in his or her plant journal. The teacher should 
check student plant journals daily to assess students’ ability to measure and record 
experiment results.
After the project: Group newsletter or PowerPoint presentation
After the completion of  the project, each student group creates either a newsletter 
or PowerPoint presentation to share the results of  their experiment. The classroom 
teacher can choose between a newsletter or PowerPoint presentation. 
If  the teacher does not have the technology to show PowerPoint presentations in the 
classroom, students can use chart paper to make their presentations. 
This is the final part of  the three-week assessment project and each student in the 
group will be evaluated for it individually and collaboratively . The teacher should 
make sure that each student has a clear role in creating the final assessment task. 
Each student should be responsible for at least one article or slide for the final 
assessment task.  
The PowerPoint presentation or newsletter should include the following:
•	 Information about the green bean competition
•	 Group’s bean plan (should include knowledge of  at least three different 
conditions needed for growing plants)
•	 Importance of  plants to our lives and our environment (at least three different 
uses of  plants)
•	 Parts of  a plant (at least three different parts)
•	 Functions of  different parts of  a plant (at least three different parts)
•	 Some interesting facts about beans (optional)
•	 Graph to display experiment results (growth of  plant over time with a line 
graph or comparison of  plant growth in different weeks with a bar graph)
•	 A poem on beans (optional, can be done in English class)
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
236
Sample line and bar graphs:
•	 In the two graphs below , the student used the length of  the tallest bean plant   
 on the last day of  each week. 
•	 For a more detailed graph, the teacher can ask students to plot the growth of    
 the plant every three or four days. 
Sample line graph (showing growth of  the bean plant over time):
Growth of bean plant (cm)
Time
Week 0
35
Length (cm)
Week 1W eek 2W eek 3
30
25
20
15
10
 5
NOTE: The line of the graph becomes steeper with every passing week, which shows that 
the rate at which the bean plant grew became faster every week. 
Sample bar graph (comparing bean plant growth during different weeks)
Growth of bean plant
Time
Length (cm)
Week 0
40
Week 1W eek 2W eek 3
30
20
10
0
NOTE: It can be seen in the graph above that the tallest bar is in week 3, which means 
that the plant grew the fastest in week 3 compared to weeks 0, 1, and 2. 
237
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
If  the students wish, they can also use the bar graph to compare the length of  their 
bean plants (on the last day of  the challenge) with the length of  their challengers’ 
bean plants. 
An example of  a student group PowerPoint presentation is available as an 
accompanying document.
Students can use these examples to create their own projects. 
Rubric for the project
The following rubric is used to assess student performance on assessment tasks 
performed during and after this project. The rubric covers student performance 
on knowledge of  plant growth, designing and conducting an experiment, group 
collaboration, and communication of  results.
Learning 
standards
Performance 
indicators
4 3 2 1
Understands 
conditions for 
plant growth
Correctly 
identifies and 
explains at least 
three conditions 
necessary for 
plant growth
Identifies and 
explains at 
least three 
conditions 
necessary for 
plant growth 
with one minor 
error
Identifies and 
explains two 
conditions 
necessary for 
plant growth 
with an error
Identifies 
and explains 
conditions 
necessary for 
plant growth 
with two or 
more major 
errors
Can identify 
parts of  a 
plant and their 
functions
Correctly 
identifies and 
labels at least 
three parts of  
a plant using a 
diagram
Identifies and 
labels at least 
three parts of  
a plant using a 
diagram
Lists three 
parts of  a plant 
without using a 
diagram
or
Uses a diagram 
but is missing 
at least one part 
of  the plant
Lists two or less 
parts of  a plant
Correctly iden-
tifies functions 
of  at least three 
parts of  a plant
Identifies 
functions of  at 
least three parts 
of  a plant with 
minor details 
either missing 
or wrong
Identifies 
functions of  
three parts of  
a plant with 
one function 
either wrong or 
missing
Identifies func-
tions of  parts 
of  a plant with 
two functions 
either missing 
or wrong
Can develop a 
hypothesis
Develops a 
clear, precise, 
and testable 
hypothesis
Develops a 
hypothesis 
that is testable 
but not clearly 
thought out
Needs minimal 
direction in 
developing a 
hypothesis
Needs a lot of  
direction in 
developing a 
hypothesis
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
238
Learning 
standards
Performance 
indicators
4 3 2 1
Can plan and 
design an 
experiment
Outlines a clear 
plan to test the 
hypothesis
Outlines a 
plan to test the 
hypothesis but is 
missing one step
Needs minimal 
direction in 
planning the 
experiment
Needs a lot of  
direction in 
planning the 
experiment
Can make 
experimental 
observations
Correctly 
observes, 
measures, and 
records change 
in plant growth 
every day
Correctly 
observes, 
measures, and 
records change 
in plant growth 
sometimes
Observes, 
measures, and 
records change 
in plant growth 
with one to 
two errors
Observes, 
measures, and 
records change 
in plant growth 
with more than 
two errors
Can draw 
conclusions
Successfully 
draws all major 
conclusions 
based on 
experimental 
evidence
Successfully 
draws most 
major conclu-
sions except 
one based on 
experimental 
evidence
Draws conclu-
sions that are 
not based on 
experimental 
evidence
Does not draw 
any conclusions
Can make 
connections 
with prior 
knowledge
Successfully 
connects previ-
ously learned 
knowledge 
about plants 
with experi-
mental results
Makes some 
connections 
between previ-
ously learned 
knowledge 
about plants 
and experimen-
tal results
Makes only one 
or two connec-
tions between 
previously 
learned knowl-
edge about 
plants and 
experimental 
results
Does not make 
any connec-
tions between 
previously 
learned knowl-
edge about 
plants and 
experimental 
results
Can present 
experimental 
results
Draws detailed 
diagrams, table, 
and chart with 
correct label-
ling to write 
experimental 
results
Draws dia-
grams, table, 
and chart with 
correct label-
ling to write 
experimental 
results
Draws dia-
grams, table, 
and chart with 
correct labelling 
to write exper-
imental results 
(with some 
details missing 
or incorrect)
Draws dia-
grams, table, 
and chart with 
labelling to 
note experi-
mental results 
(with most 
details missing 
or incorrect)
Can manage 
group work 
project
Works coop-
eratively and 
successfully 
Works coop-
eratively and 
successfully 
Sometimes 
works coop-
eratively and 
successfully 
Does not work 
cooperatively 
or fulfil role
Fulfils role and 
shows leader-
ship abilities
Fulfils role Fulfils role 
Does not work 
cooperatively 
or fulfil role
239
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Learning 
standards
Performance 
indicators
4 3 2 1
PowerPoint 
presentation
Slide has an 
appropriate 
title
Slide has a title Slide is missing 
a title
Slide is missing 
a title
Slide has appro-
priate graphics
Slide has graph-
ics that are not 
relevant
Slide does 
not have any 
graphics (the 
slide needed 
graphics but did 
not have any)
Slide does 
not have any 
graphics (the 
slide needed 
graphics but did 
not have any)
No 
grammatical, 
spelling, or 
punctuation 
errors on the 
slide
No 
grammatical, 
spelling, or 
punctuation 
errors on the 
slide
One or two 
grammatical, 
spelling, or 
punctuation 
errors on the 
slide
Slide has more 
than two 
grammatical, 
spelling, or 
punctuation 
errors
Student speaks 
with clarity and 
confidence
Student speaks 
with clarity
Presentation 
is missing one 
point that 
affects clarity 
of  thought
Presentation is 
missing more 
than one major 
point
Presents slide 
with loud, clear 
voice
Voice is not 
very loud and 
clear but can be 
heard
Student has to 
be reminded 
at least once to 
speak louder
Student has to 
be reminded 
more than once 
to speak louder
NOTE: This is a long rubric because it is assessing a complex assessment task that tests 
a few different skills (knowledge, research, collecting data, etc.). Rubrics that assess 
fewer skills are not as long and complex. 
Rubrics should be shared with students at the beginning of  assessment tasks so they 
are clearly aware of  the criteria they are being assessed against.
The idea for this activity was adapted from:
Intel Corporation, ‘The Great Bean Race’. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://educate.intel.com/en/ProjectDesign/UnitPlanIndex/GreatBeanRace/
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
240
Unit 3, week 9, session 1
The green bean competition 
Title slide
The Green Bean Competition 
By
Green Heroes
Ahmad Malik, Tania Baig, Naila Khan, 
and Zeeshan Hamid
Slide 1
Introduction
•	 Our class was asked to participate in a competition 
to see who could grow the tallest bean plant. The 
competition was called ‘The Green Bean Competition’.
•	 We competed against another group (the Green 
Machine) from Mr Cheema’s science class.
•	 Our group has four members, and each member 
worked with the group to come up with a plan to grow 
the tallest bean plant.
•	 We planted our bean plant on May 1 and nourished it 
until May 24. 
S
241
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Slide 2
Parts of a plant
Most common parts of  a plant are as follows: 
Slide 3
Functions of parts of a plant
The functions of  the main parts of  a plant:
Roots: Absorb water and minerals for the 
plant from the soil. They also hold the 
plant in place.
Stem: The stem holds the plant up. It 
carries nutrients and water from the roots 
to the leaves and food from the leaves back 
to the roots.
Leaves: The leaves help the plant breathe, 
capture sunlight energy , and prepare food 
through a process called photosynthesis.

COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
242
Slide 4
Importance of plants to our lives and environment
Food
•	 Plants make food for all humans and other animals.
•	 Through the process of  photosynthesis, plants convert 
sunlight energy into food.
Oxygen
•	 While making food through photosynthesis,  
plants produce oxygen (the gas we breathe).
Soil
•	 Roots of  a plant hold the soil together, which  
reduces erosion. 
Slide 5
Our bean plan
The three most important conditions for 
growing plants are light, water, and soil.
Keeping these conditions in mind, our group 
came up with the following bean plan:
•	 Light: We decided to put our plant 
under artificial light for 12 hours a day .
•	 Soil: We used soil that was two parts 
clay , one part sand, and one part 
humus.
•	 Water: We watered our plant after 
our soil looked dry .
243
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Slide 6
Materials used in the experiment
We used the following materials during this experiment:
•	 Two beans
•	 Polystyrene cup
•	 Ruler
•	 Our science notebooks (plant data log)
•	 Soil
•	 Plastic bags
•	 Saucer
Slide 7
Procedure
1) We germinated bean seeds in plastic 
bags that contained soil and water.
2) We transferred our germinated seeds 
to a plastic cup with our combination 
soil.
3) We kept our plants under artificial 
light for 12 hours a day for 3 weeks.
4) We watered our plants when the soil 
dried out.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
244
Slide 8
Procedure
We did the following to monitor our plants daily:
•	 Checked for soil moistness every morning
•	 Watered the plants if  the soil was dry
•	 Measured the plants every morning
¡¡ Recorded the data in our plant data logs
Slide 9
0	  
10	  
20	  
30	  
40	  
Week	  0	   Week	  1	   Week	  2	   Week	  3	  
Length	  (cm)	  
Time	  
Bean	  plant	  growth	  week	  by	  week	  
Results
We used the tallest plant in our collection to make the 
following graph:
The graph shows that our plant grew the tallest in the third week.
245
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Slide 10
Comparison of results
We competed with another group from Mr Cheema’s science 
class (the Green Machine). The comparison is as follows:
Similarities:
•	 Both groups watered the plants as needed. 
•	 Both groups used the same combination of  soil.
Differences:
•	 The Green Machine’s plant was taller than ours. It 
measured 45 cm, and our plant measured 31 cm.
•	 The Green Machine group gave their plant 24 hours of  
light, as compared to 12 hours. 
Slide 11
Conclusion
•	 We believe that the Green 
Machine’s plant grew faster and 
became taller than our plant 
because it received more light. 
•	 Because plants use light to make 
food, we believe that more light 
helped the plant grow taller.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
246
Slide 12
References
The last slide should include information about the sources 
(websites, books, newspapers) that were used to prepare 
the presentation.
Examples
1. eHow:
 Ø http://www .ehow .co.uk/list_7383883_parts-bean-plant.html
2. Globio:
 Ø http://www .globio.org/glossopedia/article.aspx?art_id=30
3. Tennessee State Improvement Grant:
 Ø https://umdrive.memphis.edu/g-sig/www/beanplant.htm
247
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 3, week 10, session 1
The professional portfolio
During Semester 4, Student Teachers will produce a professional portfolio, which is 
different from the developmental portfolio developed during the previous semester. 
The developmental portfolio included all the work completed during Semester 3. The 
professional portfolio will consist only of  Student Teachers’ ‘best practices’ over the 
course of  both semesters. 
Using the rubric developed for the National Professional Standards for Teachers in 
Pakistan (NPSTP), Student Teachers are required to develop a professional portfolio 
that contains only artefacts that indicate how they meet at least Level 2 and above 
of  the rubric. This could include the work completed by the Student Teachers 
during Semester 3, such as school-based assignments, lessons planned, observational 
tasks, feedback received, student work done, and other documents that illustrate 
the Student Teachers’ ability to enter their chosen profession. The transition from 
a developmental portfolio to a professional one demands that Student Teachers 
systematically select specific artefacts that illustrate their best work from the previous 
semester and any new artefacts from the current semester. It is important for Student 
Teachers to be selective during this process. The bulk of  the professional portfolio 
should consist of  the very best work completed by Student Teachers during Semester 4.
Throughout Semester 4, the Cooperating Teacher and College/University 
Supervisors should provide Student Teachers with feedback on their selection of  
artefacts and encourage them in the process. The Student Teacher will use the ‘Notes 
for Self-Assessment by Student Teacher’ template provided to keep continuous track 
(on a daily/weekly basis) of  the artefacts being collected. The artefacts included in the 
professional portfolio should provide evidence of  how the Student Teachers meets the 
National Professional Standards for Teachers in Pakistan rubric (aiming for Level 3), 
the standards set by the college and university , and the school site. This collection of  
materials will provide the opportunity for a multifaceted assessment of  each Student 
Teacher’s ability to teach.  
S
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
248
Although the professional portfolio is highly personalized and as such should 
represent the Student Teachers, the Student Teachers should include the best 
examples of  the following items in their professional portfolios:
•	 Artefacts that reflect their best practices from Semester 3 (taken from their   
 developmental portfolio)
•	 Complete lesson plans that include the following items:
¡¡ Lesson plan
¡¡ Feedback on the lesson plans
¡¡ Worksheets and assessment tools to be used with these lesson plans
¡¡ Worksheets used in teaching
¡¡ Samples of  work completed by the children and feedback given to them
¡¡ Reflections on the lesson planned and taught
•	 Photos, videotape, or recording of  teaching (if  available)
•	 Informal and formal observation by Cooperating Teachers and College/
University Supervisors
•	 Pre-observation guides and post-observation reflections
•	 Any other material that provides evidence of  how Student Teachers meet Level 
3 of  the rubric for the NPSTP
¡¡ A note is provided in the evaluation section about how the portfolio will be graded. 
NOTE: Student T eachers should not add blank copies of materials (such as formats for 
teacher-parent meetings, etc.) without indicating how the Student T eachers have used 
these materials.
249
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 3, week 10, session 1
National professional standards for 
teachers in Pakistan (NPSTP): Standard 
1subject matter knowledge
Standard 1: Subject matter knowledge
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4
1.1 
Source of  the 
lesson content
Teaches 
content using 
the textbook 
for the sole 
source of  
subject matter 
knowledge in 
the classroom.
Teaches 
content using 
the national 
curriculum 
as a guide 
along with the 
textbook. In 
addition, uses 
own expe-
rience, and 
understanding 
to enhance 
lesson.
Teaches content 
using the national 
curriculum as a 
guide along with 
the textbook. In 
addition uses own 
knowledge, 
experience and 
understanding 
and seeks other 
readily available 
sources of 
information 
for teaching 
and learning of 
subject matter.
Teaches content using 
the national curriculum 
as a guide along with the 
textbook. In addition uses 
own knowledge, experi-
ence and understanding 
and seeks other readily 
available sources of  
information for teaching 
and learning of  subject. 
Is aware of new emerg-
ing concepts, theories, 
research and latest 
trends in the subject 
material, at the national 
and international level.
1.2
Understanding 
of  the subject 
matter 
knowledge/
curriculum
Displays 
a basic 
knowledge 
of  the subject 
matter taught. 
Might make 
occasional 
errors.
Displays 
a good 
knowledge 
of the basic 
concepts and 
theories of 
the subject 
matter taught. 
Understands 
connections 
between the 
content and its 
application to 
practical life.
Displays excel-
lent knowledge 
of  subject matter 
taught and the 
connections 
between the 
content and its 
application to 
practical life.  
Understands the 
sequencing of 
learning topics 
and processes 
and uses these 
for planning 
instruction.
Displays excellent 
knowledge of  subject 
matter taught and the 
connections between 
the content and its 
application to practical 
life. Understands the 
sequencing of learning 
topics and processes 
and uses these for 
planning instruction. 
Understands the rela-
tionship between the 
subject matter and other 
content areas.
S
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
250
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4
1.3 
Teaching 
strategies/
pedagogy 
employed
Teaches 
content using 
generic teach-
ing methods 
without 
planning for 
misconcep-
tions by chil-
dren within 
the subject 
matter.
Teaches con-
tent and thinks 
about subject 
specific teach-
ing techniques. 
Is developing a 
general idea of 
possible types 
of miscon-
ceptions that 
children may 
have about the 
subject and 
has started to 
reflect on how 
to plan lessons 
differently to 
correct these 
misconcep-
tions.
Teaches content 
using a variety 
of subject spe-
cific techniques. 
Uses strategies 
to deal with mis-
conceptions that 
children may 
have within the 
subject. Provides 
opportunities for 
children to apply 
the subject mat-
ter knowledge 
to their practical 
lives.  W orks 
with children 
to develop their 
self confidence 
in the subject 
matter.
Plans lessons using new 
emerging subject specific 
techniques, planning 
for misconceptions, 
application of  material to 
children’s lives and imple-
ments specific strategies 
to help children to 
reflect on, check and 
correct their own work/
learning. Promotes 
meta-cognition, self 
confidence, and self 
assessment. Challenges 
all children to achieve at 
their highest level.
1.4 Activating 
child’s 
knowledge
Teaches con-
tent without 
specifically 
building on, 
or seeking 
out children’s 
prior knowl-
edge of  the 
new content.
Teaches con-
tent with the 
knowledge 
that children 
might have 
knowledge 
about the 
topic and 
includes 
questions 
to connect 
to their 
prior knowl-
edge and 
experience.
Teaches content 
by building 
on the prior 
knowledge and 
experience of 
the range of 
children in the 
classroom, in 
order for chil-
dren to under-
stand the new 
concepts.
Teaches content by 
building on different 
children’s prior knowl-
edge and helps the range 
of  diverse children to 
connect their own prior 
knowledge and expe-
rience to what is being 
taught. Understands the 
diverse learner’s talents 
and finds engaging ways 
to connect the content 
to a variety of learner’s 
interests.
251
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 3, week 10, session 1
National professional standards for 
teachers in Pakistan (NPSTP):  
Standard 4 assessment
Standard 4: Instructional planning and strategies
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4
4.1
 Long term 
planning
Plans lessons 
on a day-to-day 
basis following 
the textbook 
as a guide. 
Has some 
idea of  what 
to plan for 
the next day 
and can share 
general goals 
for child’s 
learning.1
Evidence of 
ability to pre-
pare long term 
plans: which 
include goals 
and objectives 
for each lesson, 
within the 
overall goals 
and objectives 
of the NC.2
Evidence of  ability 
to prepare long term 
plans: which include 
goals and objectives 
for each lesson, 
within the overall 
goals and objectives 
of  the NC.3
Incorporates goals 
and objectives of 
education in gener-
al as well as those 
of the curriculum 
for the specific 
subject matter.
Evidence of  ability to 
prepare long term plans: 
which include goals and 
objectives for each lesson, 
within the overall goals 
and objectives of  the 
NC4, includes objectives 
of  education in general as 
well as those of  the cur-
riculum for the specific 
subject matter. 
Modifies plans based on 
assessment of child’s 
learning.
4.2 
Lesson 
planning
Develops 
lesson plans 
that include 
instructional 
activities, 
materials, 
individual 
learning 
outcomes 
(ILO’s). 
These are not 
necessarily 
clearly aligned 
with the 
assessment 
strategies.
Develops 
lesson plans 
that include 
instructional 
activities, 
materials, 
individual 
learning 
outcomes (ILOs) 
and assessment 
strategies. 
There is a clear 
alignment 
between the 
ILO’s, the 
instructional 
activities and 
the assessment 
strategies.
Develops effective 
lesson plans where 
instructional 
activities, ILO’s, and 
assessment strategies 
are clearly aligned. 
Lesson plans 
include formal and 
informal methods 
of assessment, as 
well as a wide range 
of community and 
technology resourc-
es to promote 
achievement of  
lesson objectives. 
Includes reading 
and writing strate-
gies appropriate for 
this age.
Develops effective lesson 
plans which include well 
aligned instructional 
activities, ILO’s, formal 
and informal assessment 
strategies. Community 
and technology resources 
are also incorporated.
Includes pedagogical 
knowledge and research 
on teaching and learn-
ing as sources for active 
reflection, evaluation 
and revision of practice.
S
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
252
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4
4.3 
Using 
instructional 
resources
Uses some 
instructional 
resources with 
each lesson, 
not necessarily 
matched to 
achieving 
planned learn-
ing outcomes.
Uses instruc-
tional resources 
in ways that 
are matched 
to achieving 
planned learn-
ing outcomes 
but use is still 
teacher cen-
tered. Children 
benefit from 
using the 
materials.
Uses a variety of  
available instruc-
tional resources in 
ways that are well 
matched to achiev-
ing planned learning 
outcomes and 
promote higher 
order thinking and 
understanding. 
The instructional 
resources accom-
modate different 
learning styles.
Use a variety of  available 
instructional resources 
in ways that are well 
matched to achieving 
planned learning out-
comes, and children 
are actively engaged in, 
create and make choices 
about using instruction-
al resources. Teacher 
is able to evaluate the 
resources for their 
comprehensiveness, 
accuracy and usefulness 
for representing partic-
ular ideas and concepts.
Learner centred: In the learner-centred paradigm, effective teaching is defined as 
facilitating student learning. Learner-centred classroom instruction involves less 
instructor domination and shifts more communication, control, and responsibility to 
the children. In student-centred learning, children construct knowledge for themselves 
with the help of  their teacher and their peers.
Teacher centred: A teacher-centred approach is one in which activity in the class 
is centred on the teacher. Teacher-centred lessons are generally associated with 
traditional approaches to education, but teacher-centred activities can be useful in a 
variety of  ways in teaching.
1 Goal: The purpose toward which teaching 
and learning is directed
2 Long-term plan: A plan for a term, semester, 
or several weeks
3 Long-term plan: A plan for a term, semester, 
or several weeks
4 Long-term plan: A plan for a term, semester, 
or several weeks
253
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 4, week 11, session 3
Sun, Earth, and the Moon unit test
Section I: Multiple-choice questions
Please choose the best answer for the questions below .
1. Which of  the following objects does not exist in the sky? 
 a.   the Sun 
 b.   meteors
 c.   mammoths
 d.   asteroids
2. Which of  the following objects resembles the shape of  the Earth? 
 a.   an egg
 b.   an orange
 c.   a leaf
 d.   a disc
3. The movement of  the Earth around the Sun is called
 a.   rotation.
 b.   oscillation.
 c.   revolution.
 d.   vibration.
4. The time it takes for the Earth to orbit the Sun is
 a.   a year.
 b.   a month.
 c.   a week.
 d.   a day .
S
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
254
Use the following diagram to answer the question below . 
 
the North Star
the sphere of the sky around a central axis
Note: The diagram is not drawn to scale.
5. At one point, the ancient Greeks thought of  the Earth as shown in the 
diagram above (a flat disc situated in a ball of  hollow sky that moves). Which 
of  the following statements would have to be true for this model to be true? 
a.   We would be able to travel to a place on the Earth where the Earth meets 
the sky .
b.   We would be able to travel to a place on the Earth where the Sun sets.
c.   We would be able to travel to a place on the Earth where the Sun rises.
d.   All of  the above would have to be true.
e.   None of  the above would have to be true.
6. The northern hemisphere of  the Earth is 
 a.   an imaginary line around which the Earth spins.
 b.   the half  of  the planet that is north of  its equator.
 c.   the half  of  the planet that is south of  its equator.
 d.   the part of  the Earth facing the Sun.
7. Day and night happen because
 a.   the Earth is spinning around its axis. 
 b.   the Sun hides in the deep sky .
 c.   someone turns off  the lights of  the universe.
 d.   the Earth goes far away from the Sun.
255
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Use the diagram below to answer the next two questions. In this diagram, ‘e’ 
represents the Earth and ‘N’ represents north.
Note: The diagram is not drawn to scale.
8. In the northern hemisphere, which season is occurring in the above diagram? 
 a.   Winter
 b.   Summer
 c.   Spring
 d.   Fall
9. Which season will occur in the northern hemisphere six months after the 
season shown in the above diagram? 
 a.   Winter
 b.   Summer
 c.   Spring
 d.   Fall
10. When the Moon is between the Earth and the Sun and we cannot see its 
lit-up side at all from the Earth, this phase of  the Moon is called the 
 a.   first-quarter phase.
 b.   full Moon phase.
 c.   last-quarter phase.
 d.   new Moon phase.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
256
Use the following diagram to answer the next question. In this diagram, ‘e’ represents 
the Earth; ‘S’ represents the Sun; and A, B, C, and D are different positions of  the Moon.
Note: The diagram above and the diagrams in questions 11 and 12 are not drawn to scale.
11. From Earth, which position would show the half  Moon phase? 
 
 a.   Position A 
 b.   Position B
 c.   Position C
 d.   Position D
12. From Earth, which position would show the full Moon phase? 
 
 a.   Position A 
 b.   Position B
 c.   Position C
 d.   Position D
13. If  a complete Moon cycle takes approximately 28 days, about how many days 
during a month could you expect to see a crescent Moon? 
 
 a.   1 
 b.   2
 c.   7
 d.   13
14. Imagine you are an astronaut and your mission is to pull out the Earth’s axis. 
Which one of  the following is true about your mission? 
 a.   Because the axis of  the Earth is an imaginary line, you cannot physically  
  pull it out.
 b.   If  you put a very strong magnet in space next to the Earth, it will be able  
  to pull out the axis.
 c.   The axis of  the Earth is too large and heavy to be pulled out of  the Earth.
 d.   The axis of  the Earth is too delicate and will break into pieces before it   
  can be pulled out.
257
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
15. If  you saw a full Moon last night, which phase of  the Moon would you see in 
a week? 
 a.   First-quarter Moon
 b.   Third-quarter Moon
 c.   Waxing crescent Moon
 d.   New Moon
Section II: True-false questions
Use the following diagram to answer the next question. 
Sun
Earth
Moon
Note: The diagram is not drawn to scale.
16. The diagram above represents the correct positions of  the Sun, Moon, and 
the Earth in the solar system. 
 a.   True
 b.   False
17. The solar system is composed of  eight planets, and the Sun is in the centre. 
 a.   True 
 b.   False
18. Viewed from the Earth with the human eye, planets look very small because 
they are so far away . 
 a.   True 
 b.   False 
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
258
19. Winter and summer are determined by the Earth’s distance from the Sun. 
 a.   True
 b.   False
20. Earth’s seasonal temperature changes—cold in the winter, hot in the summer, 
and mild in the spring and fall—are the result of  the tilt of  the Earth’s axis as 
it spins around the Sun. 
 a.   True
 b.   False
21. According to the following diagram of  the Earth and the Sun, the location 
indicated by the white heart (on Earth) is experiencing day . 
 a.   True
 b.   False
Note: The diagram is not drawn to scale.
Section III: Sentence-completion questions
Please fill in the missing blanks for the questions below
22. The Sun’s diameter is ______ times that of  the Earth’s diameter. 
23. The Earth is ______ Sun diameters away from the Sun. 
24. The Moon’s diameter is ______ the size of  the Earth’s diameter.  
25. The Sun’s diameter is ______ times that of  the Moon’s diameter. 
26. When the Earth spins around itself, this movement is called ____________. 
27. One complete revolution of  the Moon around the Earth is called _________. 
259
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Section IV: Matching questions
Match the terms in the following questions with the correct choices.
28. Match the following movements of  the Sun, Earth, and the Moon with the 
phenomena they cause. 
One week (7 days)
a.   Earth’s movement around itself
One day (24 hours)
b.   Moon’s movement around the Earth
One year (365 days)
c.   Earth’s movement around the Sun
Approximately one month (28 days)
29. Your teacher has asked you to pick objects to represent a scale model of  the 
Sun, Earth, and the Moon. Match the name of  the object you would use to 
represent the Sun, Earth, and the Moon. Put the correct letter in front of  the 
Sun, Earth, and Moon. 
a.   A ball (1 metre in diameter)
The Sun
b.   A ball (1 centimetre in diameter)
The Moon
c.   A marble (3 centimetres in diameter)
The Earth
d.   A tiny bead (3 millimetres in diameter)
Section V: Short-answer questions
Provide answers for the questions below in one or two sentences.
30. T he planet Mars is bigger than the Moon, but the Moon seems much bigger 
in the night sky . Why? 
31. Ho w far is the Moon from the Earth? 
32. Using the answer from question 31, draw a scale model of  the Sun, Earth, and 
the Moon. (Hint: Use appropriate distance and size.) 
33. Name an e xample of  a scale model from your everyday life and explain in one 
line why it is a scale model.  
34. Do all places on Ear th experience day and night at the same time? Why or 
why not? 
35. Describe in one or tw o sentences the major difference between rotation 
and revolution. 
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
260
Unit 4, week 11, session 3
Sun, Earth, and the Moon unit test key
Section I: Multiple-choice questions
Please choose the best answer for the questions below .
1. Which of  the following objects does not exist in the sky? 
 a.   the Sun 
 b.   meteors
 c.   mammoths
 d.   asteroids
2. Which of  the following objects resembles the shape of  the Earth? 
 a.   an egg
 b.   an orange
 c.   a leaf
 d.   a disc
3. The movement of  the Earth around the Sun is called
 a.   rotation.
 b.   oscillation.
 c.   revolution.
 d.   vibration.
4. The time it takes for the Earth to orbit the Sun is
 a.   a year.
 b.   a month.
 c.   a week.
 d.   a day .
S
261
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Use the following diagram to answer the question below . 
 
the North Star
the sphere of the sky around a central axis
Note: The diagram is not drawn to scale.
5. At one point, the ancient Greeks thought of  the Earth as shown in the 
diagram above (a flat disc situated in a ball of  hollow sky that moves). Which 
of  the following statements would have to be true for this model to be true? 
a.   We would be able to travel to a place on the Earth where the Earth meets 
the sky .
b.   We would be able to travel to a place on the Earth where the Sun sets.
c.   We would be able to travel to a place on the Earth where the Sun rises.
d.   All of  the above would have to be true.
e.   None of  the above would have to be true.
6. The northern hemisphere of  the Earth is 
 a.   an imaginary line around which the Earth spins.
 b.   the half  of  the planet that is north of  its equator.
 c.   the half  of  the planet that is south of  its equator.
 d.   the part of  the Earth facing the Sun.
7. Day and night happen because
 a.   the Earth is spinning around its axis. 
 b.   the Sun hides in the deep sky .
 c.   someone turns off  the lights of  the universe.
 d.   the Earth goes far away from the Sun.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
262
Use the diagram below to answer the next two questions. In this diagram, ‘e’ 
represents the Earth and ‘N’ represents north.
Note: The diagram is not drawn to scale.
8. In the northern hemisphere, which season is occurring in the above diagram? 
 a.   Winter
 b.   Summer
 c.   Spring
 d.   Fall
9. Which season will occur in the northern hemisphere six months after the 
season shown in the above diagram? 
 a.   Winter
 b.   Summer
 c.   Spring
 d.   Fall
10. When the Moon is between the Earth and the Sun and we cannot see its 
lit-up side at all from the Earth, this phase of  the Moon is called the 
 a.   first-quarter phase.
 b.   full Moon phase.
 c.   last-quarter phase.
 d.   new Moon phase.
263
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Use the following diagram to answer the next question. In this diagram, ‘e’ represents 
the Earth; ‘S’ represents the Sun; and A, B, C, and D are different positions of  the Moon.
Note: The diagram above and the diagrams in questions 11 and 12 are not drawn to scale.
11. From Earth, which position would show the half  Moon phase? 
 a.   Position A 
 b.   Position B
 c.   Position C
 d.   Position D
12. From Earth, which position would show the full Moon phase? 
 a.   Position A 
 b.   Position B
 c.   Position C
 d.   Position D
13. If  a complete Moon cycle takes approximately 28 days, about how many days 
during a month could you expect to see a crescent Moon? 
 a.   1
 b.   2
 c.   7
 d.   13
14. Imagine you are an astronaut and your mission is to pull out the Earth’s axis. 
Which one of  the following is true about your mission? 
 a.   Because the axis of  the Earth is an imaginary line, you cannot physically  
  pull it out.
 b.   If  you put a very strong magnet in space next to the Earth, it will be able  
  to pull out the axis.
 c.   The axis of  the Earth is too large and heavy to be pulled out of  the Earth.
 d.   The axis of  the Earth is too delicate and will break into pieces before it   
  can be pulled out.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
264
15. If  you saw a full Moon last night, which phase of  the Moon would you see in 
a week? 
 a.   First-quarter Moon
 b.   Third-quarter Moon
 c.   Waxing crescent Moon
 d.   New Moon
Section II: True-false questions
Use the following diagram to answer the next question. 
Sun
Earth
Moon
Note: The diagram is not drawn to scale.
16. The diagram above represents the correct positions of  the Sun, Moon, and 
the Earth in the solar system. 
 a.   True
 b.   False
17. The solar system is composed of  eight planets, and the Sun is in the centre. 
 a.   True 
 b.   False
18. Viewed from the Earth with the human eye, planets look very small because 
they are so far away . 
 a.   True 
 b.   False 
265
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
19. Winter and summer are determined by the Earth’s distance from the Sun. 
 a.   True
 b.   False
20. Earth’s seasonal temperature changes—cold in the winter, hot in the summer, 
and mild in the spring and fall—are the result of  the tilt of  the Earth’s axis as 
it spins around the Sun. 
 a.   True
 b.   False
21. According to the following diagram of  the Earth and the Sun, the location 
indicated by the white heart (on Earth) is experiencing day . 
 a.   True
 b.   False
Note: The diagram is not drawn to scale.
Section III: Sentence-completion questions
Please fill in the missing blanks for the questions below
22. The Sun’s diameter is    100    times that of  the Earth’s diameter. 
23. The Earth is    100    Sun diameters away from the Sun. 
24. The Moon’s diameter is one-fourth (or 1/4) the size of  the Earth’s diameter.  
25. The Sun’s diameter is    400    times that of  the Moon’s diameter. 
26. When the Earth spins around itself, this movement is called    rotation   . 
27. One complete revolution of  the Moon around the Earth is called the lunar cycle. 
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
266
Section IV: Matching questions
Match the terms in the following questions with the correct choices.
28. Match the following movements of  the Sun, Earth, and the Moon with the 
phenomena they cause. 
a.   Earth’s movement around itself  Answer: One day (24 hours)
b.   Moon’s movement around the Earth Answer: Approximately 
one month (28 days)
c.   Earth’s movement around the Sun Answer: One year (365 days)
29. Your teacher has asked you to pick objects to represent a scale model of  the 
Sun, Earth, and the Moon. Match the name of  the object you would use to 
represent the Sun, Earth, and the Moon. Put the correct letter in front of  the 
Sun, Earth, and Moon. 
a.   A ball (1 metre in diameter) Answer: The Sun
b.   A ball (1 centimetre in diameter) Answer: The Earth
c.   A marble (3 centimetres n diameter)
d.   A tiny bead (3 millimetres in diameter) Answer: The Moon
Section V: Short-answer questions
Provide answers for the questions below in one or two sentences.
30. The planet Mars is bigger than the Moon, but the Moon seems much bigger 
in the night sky . Why? 
 Answer: The Moon appears to be bigger than Mars because the distance between the 
Earth and Mars is much greater than the distance between the Earth and the Moon.
31. How far is the Moon from the Earth? 
 Answer: The Moon is 30 Earths away from the Earth.
32. Using the answer from question 31, draw a scale model of  the Sun, Earth, and 
the Moon. (Hint: Use appropriate distance and size.) 
 Answer: A lot of diagrams are possible so no example is given here.
33. Name an example of  a scale model from your everyday life and explain in one 
line why it is a scale model.  
 Possible answer: A globe. It is a scale model because even though it is much smaller than 
the Earth, the sizes of  water and land bodies are proportional to their actual size.
267
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
34. Do all places on Earth experience day and night at the same time? Why or 
why not? 
 Answer: All places on Earth do not experience day and night at the same time because 
all parts of  the Earth are not facing the Sun at the same time. 
 or 
 Answer: When the Earth spins on its axis, the side facing the Sun experiences day 
and the side facing away from the Sun experiences night.
35. Describe in one or two sentences the major difference between rotation and 
revolution. 
 Answer: When a body spins around itself, it is considered to rotation. When a body 
spins around another body, it is considered to be revolving. 
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
268
Unit 4, week 12, session 1 
T emplate for T able of Specifications for 
the Sun, Earth, and the Moon unit test
Content Knowledge 
definition
Knowledge 
Recognition 
and 
identification
Comprehension Application T otal 
number Per cent
Number of  items T: --
Per cent -- 100
S
269
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 4, week 12, session 1
Subject matter topics for the Sun, Earth, 
and the Moon unit grouped by learning 
objective
This document lists the name of  the lessons and their objectives from the ‘Sun, Earth, 
and the Moon’ unit. This is a resource for Student Teachers to use when working with 
the Table of  Specifications in Unit 4, Week 12. 
Lesson 1: Objects in the sky
Learning objectives
•	 Students will understand that the universe is vast and has millions of  different 
types of  objects, including our solar system.
•	 Students will understand that the Sun is the centre of  our solar system, which 
has eight planets.
•	 Students will recognize the position of  the Sun, Earth, and its Moon in the 
solar system.
•	 Students will know that all the planets revolve around the Sun in a circular path.
•	 Students will know the meaning of  the word orbit and that paths of  the planets 
around the Sun are called orbits.
Lesson 2: How big, how far
Learning objectives
•	 Students will understand the concept of  a scale model.
•	 Students will understand the relative size differences between the Sun, Earth, 
and the Moon.
•	 Students will be able to understand the relative distances between the Sun, 
Earth, and the Moon.
•	 Students will know that the Sun’s diameter is more than 100 times as big as the 
Earth’s diameter, and the Earth is about 100 Sun diameters away from the Sun.
•	 Students will understand that the Moon’s diameter is around one-fourth the 
size of  Earth’s diameter, and it is about 30 Earths away from the Earth.
Lesson 3: Endless Earth
Learning objectives
•	 Students will be familiar with the concept of  spherical shapes.
•	 Students will understand that the Earth is a sphere.
•	 Students will be able to explain why they think that the Earth is a sphere.
•	 Students will be familiar with the discovery that the Earth is a sphere.
S
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
270
Lesson 4: Movements of the Earth
Learning objectives
•	 Students will understand that the Earth moves around itself  and around the Sun.
•	 Students will be able to define the rotation and revolution of  the Earth.
•	 Students will be able to differentiate between the concepts of  rotation and revolution. 
•	 Students will understand that the Earth’s axis is an imaginary line drawn 
through the Earth’s centre to represent its tilt and movement.
•	 Student will know the time it takes the Earth to complete a rotation and a revolution.
Lesson 5: Day and night
Learning objectives
•	 Students will understand the process by which day and night occurs.
•	 Students will be able to explain the role of  the Sun in creating day and night.
•	 Students will be able to explain the role of  the Earth’s rotation in creating day 
and night.
Lesson 6: Reason for seasons
Learning objects
•	 Students will understand that the Earth rotates around itself  on an axis.
•	 Students will understand the concepts of  the southern hemisphere, northern 
hemisphere, and equator.
•	 Students will know that the axis of  the Earth is tilted.
•	 Students will comprehend that the tilt in the Earth’s axis causes different 
hemispheres of  the Earth to experience different seasons.
Lesson 7: Phases of the Moon 
Learning objectives
•	 Students will know that the Moon does not generate any light; it only reflects 
the light from the Sun.
•	 Students will learn that the Moon revolves around the Earth in a counter-
clockwise fashion.
•	 Students will understand that the journey of  the Moon around the Earth is 
called a lunar, or Moon phase, cycle.
•	 Students will know that it takes the Moon approximately 28 days* to complete 
one lunar cycle.
•	 Student will learn that there are four major phases of  the Moon.
•	 Students will be familiar with the names of  the four major phases of  the Moon.
* The time between two full moons (a 
Lunar cycle) is about 29.5 days. However, 
the time it takes the Moon to make one 
orbit around the Earth is about 27.5 days. 
This difference is caused by the fact 
that the Earth-Moon system is orbiting 
around the Sun at the same time the 
Moon is orbiting around the Earth. For 
simplicity, this document talks about the 
lunar cycle and the Moon’s orbit around 
the Earth as if they are the same duration, 
approximately 28 days.
271
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 4, week 12, session 1 
Learning objectives from lessons in the 
‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’ unit grouped 
by subject matter topics 
Basic knowledge
Basic terms
•	 Identifies the definition of  all vocabulary terms
Positions of solar objects
•	 Recognizes that there are many different types of  objects in the sky (is able to 
name objects)
•	 Identifies the position of  Sun, Earth, and the Moon in the solar system
•	 Arranges Sun, Earth, and Moon pictures in correct order in the solar system
Nature of solar objects
•	 Identifies the correct shape of  the Earth
•	 Identifies the correct movement of  the Earth around itself  and around the Sun
•	 Recognizes the time it takes the Earth to complete one full rotation and revolution
•	 Recognizes that the Moon revolves around the Earth
•	 Recognizes the time it takes the Moon to revolve around the Earth
•	 Recognizes that the Moon does not emit its own light but reflects the light from 
the Sun
•	 Recognizes that it takes the Moon approximately 28 days* to complete one 
revolution around the Earth
•	 Names the four major phases of  the Moon
Understanding
Roles of the Sun, Earth, and Moon system in our lives
•	 Distinguishes between the actual size differences and the relative size 
differences of  the Sun, Earth, and Moon 
•	 Distinguishes between the actual distances and the relative distances between 
the Sun, Earth, and Moon 
•	 Explains why things that are farther away look smaller
•	 Identifies the relative size differences between the Sun, Earth, and the Moon
•	 Identifies the evidence that proves that Earth is a sphere
•	 Distinguishes between rotation and revolution
•	 Differentiates between examples of  rotation and revolution
•	 Identifies that the occurrence of  day and night are caused by the rotation of  the 
Earth around its axis 
S
* The time between two full moons (a 
Lunar cycle) is about 29.5 days. However, 
the time it takes the Moon to make one 
orbit around the Earth is about 27.5 days. 
This difference is caused by the fact 
that the Earth-Moon system is orbiting 
around the Sun at the same time the 
Moon is orbiting around the Earth. For 
simplicity, this document talks about the 
lunar cycle and the Moon’s orbit around 
the Earth as if they are the same duration, 
approximately 28 days.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
272
•	 Identifies the role of  the Sun in creating day and night 
•	 Identifies the role of  the tilt of  the Earth’s axis and revolution of  the Earth 
around the Sun in creating seasons
•	 Recognizes the role of  the Sun in creating seasons
•	 Identifies the correct diagram of  revolution of  the Moon around the Sun
•	 Matches the names of  the different phases of  the Moon to their correct diagrams
Application
Diagram interpretation
•	 Picks the correct diagram to represent the relative size differences between the 
Sun, Earth, and the Moon
•	 Arranges the diagrams of  the Sun, Earth, and the Moon in their correct 
positions according to their relative distances from one another
•	 Identifies the correct diagram of  the Sun and Earth depicting day and night at a 
marked location
•	 Identifies the correct diagram of  the Sun and Earth depicting winter and 
summer at the marked location
•	 Uses the waxing and waning Moon terminology to match the name of  the 
Moon phase to its correct diagram
Daily life examples
•	 Provides examples of  revolution and rotation movements from daily life
•	 Picks correct examples depicting the relationship between distance and size
Content outline 
Solar system
•	 Names of  solar objects
•	 Positions of  the Sun, Earth, and the Moon
Sizes and distances
•	 Relative size differences between the Sun, Earth, and the Moon
•	 Relative distances between the Sun, Earth, and the Moon
Earth
•	 Earth’s shape
•	 Evidence for Earth’s shape
•	 Movements of  the Earth
Phenomena caused by movements of the Earth
•	 Day and night
•	 Seasons
Moon
•	 Movements of  the Moon
•	 Lunar phases
273
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 4, week 12, session 1
T able of Specifications for the Sun, Earth, 
and the Moon unit test
Content Knowledge 
definition
Knowledge 
Recognition 
and 
identification
Comprehension Application T otal 
number Per cent
Solar system 
relationships 1 1 2 2 6 17.1
Sizes, shapes, 
distances 2 3 1 2 8 22.9
Earth 1 1 2 1 5 14.3
Phenomena 
caused by Earth 
movements 
1 3 3 2 9 25.7
Moon 1 2 2 2 7 20
Number of  items 6 10 10 9 T: 35 --
Per cent 17.1 28.6 28.6 25.7 -- 100
S
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
274
Unit 4, week 12, session 2
Use of Bloom’s T axonomy of educational 
objectives to create test questions 
Benjamin Bloom identified six learning objectives, ranging from ‘knowledge’, which 
represented simpler mental processes, to ‘evaluation’, which represented the highest 
level of  cognitive skills. Moving from knowledge toward evaluation requires students 
to use higher-order mental skills at each level. The ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’ unit 
test uses the first three levels (knowledge, comprehension or understanding, and 
application) from Bloom’s taxonomy . The definitions of  these categories used to 
create the unit test are as follows.
Knowledge
This category requires the lowest level of  cognitive skills and involves recognition 
and/or recollection of  previously learned material.
V erbs used in questions asking for knowledge include define, list, identify, describe, 
match, and locate.
Examples of  stems for questions asking for knowledge: ‘Where did …?’,  
‘What was …?’, Who was …?’, and ‘When did …?’
Comprehension/understanding
As is apparent from the name, this category represents understanding of  the learned 
material, and it requires higher-level cognitive skills than the knowledge category . 
Tasks such as summarizing information, interpreting the material, and recognizing 
trends are examples of  this category .
V erbs used in questions asking for comprehension include summarize, interpret, rewrite, 
and give an example.
Examples of  stems for questions asking for comprehension: ‘Tell me in your own 
words …’, ‘What it is meant by …?’, and ‘What is the main idea of  …?’ 
Application
This category goes one step beyond comprehension and represents the level where a 
student is able is to use the learned material in new and concrete situations.
V erbs used in questions asking for application include demonstrate, show, operate, 
construct, and apply.
Examples of  stems for questions asking for application: ‘What would happen if  …?’, 
‘How would you solve this problem …?’, and ‘Would you have done the same as …?’  
S
275
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
T ask
Keep these descriptions, verbs, and question stems in mind as you identify the categories 
for the following 10 questions. Write ‘K’ for knowledge, ‘C’ for comprehension, and ‘ A ’ 
for application at the end of  each question to denote its category . 
1. The Moon cycle repeats itself  every ____________. 
2. The Moon produces its own light. 
 a.   True
 b.   False
3. Explain what would happen if  the Earth stopped moving around itself. 
4. Why is it summer in the southern hemisphere when it is winter in the 
northern hemisphere? 
 a.   The southern hemisphere heats up really fast.
 b.   The southern hemisphere receives the most direct rays from the Sun.
 c.   The southern hemisphere is in the path of  warm winds from the north.
 d.   The southern hemisphere balances out the temperatures for Earth.
5. What happens every 24 hours? 
 a.   The Sun goes around the Earth once.
 b.   The Earth goes around its axis once.
 c.   The Earth goes around the Sun once.
 d.   None of  the above happens.
 
6. If  you saw a full Moon last night, when would you see the full Moon again? 
7. Think about how far the Moon is from the Earth. The Sun is 
 a.   about the same distance from the Moon.
 b.   about twice as far as the distance to the Moon.
 c.   10 times farther than the distance to the Moon.
 d.   much farther than any of  these distances.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
276
8. The following diagram represents the Sun and Earth. Write the letters A, B, 
C, and D to represent the positions of  the Moon relative to Earth and the Sun 
when it is in the following phases: full (A), new (B), waxing gibbous (C), and 
waning crescent (D). 
Sun Earth
9. Why do we only see one side of  the Moon? 
10. Illustrate the positions of  the Earth, Moon, and Sun at the waxing crescent 
phase. Make sure to label the diagram. The diagram does not have to be 
drawn to scale. 
277
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 4, week 12, session 2
Use of Bloom’s T axonomy of educational 
objectives to create test questions  
(answer key)
T ask
Keep these descriptions, verbs, and question stems in mind as you identify 
the categories for the following 10 questions. Write ‘K’ for knowledge, ‘C’ for 
comprehension, and ‘ A ’ for application at the end of  each question to denote its 
category . Use the unit test questions as examples to complete this task.
NOTE TO INSTRUCTOR: The category group for each question is written in parentheses.
1. The Moon cycle repeats itself  every ____________. (K)
2. The Moon produces its own light. (K)
 a.   True
 b.   False
3. Explain what would happen if  the Earth stopped moving around itself ? (A)
4. Why is it summer in the southern hemisphere when it is winter in the 
northern hemisphere? (C)
 a.   The southern hemisphere heats up really fast.
 b.   The southern hemisphere receives the most direct rays from the Sun.
 c.   The southern hemisphere is in the path of  warm winds from the north.
 d.   The southern hemisphere balances out the temperatures for Earth.
5. What happens every 24 hours? (K)
 a.   The Sun goes around the Earth once.
 b.   The Earth goes around its axis once.
 c.   The Earth goes around the Sun once.
 d.   None of  the above happens.
 
6. If  you saw a full Moon last night, when would you see the full Moon again? (C)
7. Think about how far the Moon is from the Earth. The Sun is (C)
 a.   about the same distance from the Moon.
 b.   about twice as far as the distance to the Moon.
 c.   10 times farther than the distance to the Moon.
 d.   much farther than any of  these distances.
S
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
278
8. The following diagram represents the Sun and Earth. Write the letters A, B, 
C, and D to represent the positions of  the Moon relative to Earth and the Sun 
when it is in the following phases: full (A), new (B), waxing gibbous (C), and 
waning crescent (D). (C)
Sun Earth
9. Why do we only see one side of  the Moon? (C)
10. Illustrate the positions of  the Earth, Moon, and Sun at the waxing crescent 
phase. Make sure to label the diagram. The diagram does not have to be 
drawn to scale. (A)
279
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 4, week 12, session 3
Guidelines for writing test questions
Selected-response test questions
True-false questions
Example:
Read the following sentences. If  the sentence is grammatically correct, circle the ‘C’. 
If  it is grammatically incorrect, circle the ‘I’. 
Sentence Correct Incorrect
1. I heard you was at the bowling party . C I
2. He don’t plan to study engineering at college. C I
3. Are you calling us? C I
4. The rear tires had wore out. C I
Guidelines for writing true-false questions
1. Write clear directions about how to mark the correct answers (for example, 
underline or circle the T or F) on the test paper. Repeat these directions orally 
before students start the test.
2. Write questions based on statements that have been presented to students in 
lessons and discussions as definitely true or definitely false. Ideas that have been 
presented to students as opinion are not eligible to be true-false questions.
3. Make sure there are equal numbers of  true and false questions in the test.
4. Make sure the true and false questions are of  approximately equal length.
5. Questions should not contain two negatives (for example, no, not, and never).
 Do not write questions that contain words indicating an indefinite quantity or 
time (small, briefly, or frequently, for example) or absolutes (for example, never, 
only, always).
6. Be careful not to place questions in the test in a pattern (true-true-false-false, 
for example), because students may detect the pattern and use it to choose an 
answer rather than reading the question.
7. Create your own questions rather than taking sentences out of  context from 
a textbook and turning the sentences into test questions. 
8. True-false questions create a 50 per cent chance that the student who guesses 
will choose the right answer. Before the test begins, encourage all students to 
guess if  they don’t know the correct answer.
S
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
280
Matching questions
Example:
Match each term with its definition.
 Deposition
 Erosion
 Lithification
 Weathering
 a.   The chemical alteration and breakdown of  rock
 b.   The conversion of  sediment to rock
 c.   The dropping of  sediment into a long-term reservoir
 d.   The picking up and carrying away of  sediment
Guidelines for writing matching questions:
1. The description list (the items for which the question seeks a match) and the 
options list (the matches) should be short.
2. Lists for matching should be homogeneous (for example, all names, or all 
places, or all events, or all dates). Students should not be expected to match 
some names and some dates in the same question, for example.
3. Number each description (1, 2, 3, etc.) and letter each option (a, b, c, etc.).
4. Include more options than descriptions. In the example above, this could 
mean taking out definition ‘D’ so that students choose from four terms for 
three definitions.
5. In some questions, include options that can be used with more than  
one description.
6. Directions for answering matching questions on the test should tell (or show) 
students how to answer the question (for example, by drawing a line to 
connect the correct option with the description or by writing the letter of  the 
correct option next to each description).
7. Tell students before they begin the test if  an option can match more than 
one description. 
281
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Multiple-choice questions
Example:
Why is it summer in the southern hemisphere when it is winter in the northern hemisphere? 
 a.   The southern hemisphere heats up really fast
 b.   The southern hemisphere receives the most direct rays from the Sun
 c.   The southern hemisphere is in the path of  warm winds from the north
 d.   The southern hemisphere balances out temperatures for the Earth
The question’s stem is ‘Why is it summer in the southern hemisphere when it is 
winter in the northern hemisphere?’ The students’ choices for answers to the question 
are a, b, c, and d. 
Most multiple-choice questions assess either knowledge or understanding (comprehension). 
This question assesses knowledge:
What happens to the relationship between the Earth and Sun every 24 hours? 
 a.   The Sun goes around the Earth once
 b.   The Earth rotates on its axis once
 c.   The Earth goes around the Sun once 
Guidelines for writing multiple-choice questions
1. Make sure that the stem contains enough information for students to  
understand the question.
2. All distracter (wrong answer) choices must be plausible, yet wrong.
3. Keep the length and form of  the answer choices approximately equal.
4. Avoid negative stems. For example:
 Which of  the following is not a symptom of  malaria?
 a.   Tiredness
 b.   Fever
 c.   Chills
 d.   Skin rash
 Better to write: 
 Which of  the following is a symptom of  malaria?
 a.   Spots
 b.   Swollen ankles
 c.   Fever
 d.   Skin rash
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
282
5. Eliminate unintentional grammatical clues. In the following example, the use 
of  ‘a’ suggests the answer.
 Albert Eisenstein was: 
 a. anthropologist 
 b. astronomer 
 c. chemist 
 d. a mathematician 
6. Rotate the position of  the correct answer on a random basis from question 
to question.
7. You don’t need to have the same number of  distracters for each question. 
Distracters can range from three to five in one test.  
8. Try to test for knowledge rather than encourage guessing.
9. Try to avoid repetition of  concepts and vocabulary in response options.
10. Avoid using the response options ‘all of  the above’ and ‘none of  the above’.
Interpretive questions
Most true-false, matching, and multiple-choice questions test knowledge, understanding 
(comprehension), and application (using learned material in new situations). However, 
true-false and/or multiple-choice questions can be created that require the use of  
higher-order cognitive skills, which Benjamin Bloom would identify as analysis, 
synthesis, and evaluation. Such test questions are often called interpretive questions. 
Interpretive questions present students with some information (a story , table of  data, 
map, graph, chart, mathematical principle, or picture) and then ask questions that can 
be answered using the information provided. The intent is to assess reasoning, critical 
thinking, and problem-solving skills.
This is an example of  an interpretive question that asks students to identify the 
information that will help solve a simple problem.  
 Fauzia lost her notebook on the way to school this morning. The notebook 
was a gift from her aunt. It has a blue cover. Fauzia drew a border of  flowers 
on the first page of  the notebook. The notebook is new , and she can’t 
remember if  she wrote her name on it. She wants her teacher to tell the 
students in her class about the lost notebook so they can help her find it.
283
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
 What should the teacher tell the class? Circle yes if  you think the information 
in the sentences that follow will help Fauzia’s classmates find the notebook.
 yes no 1. The notebook was new .
 yes no 2. Fauzia rides in a car to school.
 yes no 3. The notebook was a gift.
 yes no 4. The notebook was purchased in Karachi.
 yes no 5. The notebook has a blue cover.
 yes no 6. Fauzia’s teacher knows Fauzia’s aunt.
1. Define the cognitive task (for example, distinguish between fact and opinion, 
make an inference, apply a principle, recognize an assumption, or evaluate an 
argument) to be assessed precisely before writing the question.
2. Make sure the information to be interpreted is new to students, brief, and accurate.
3. Ask several questions. Mix multiple-choice and true-false questions.
4. Make sure the material to be interpreted can be read by the students.
5. Write the questions so that students cannot answer them unless they read and 
understood the information provided in the question.
 
Constructed-response test questions
The simplest forms of  constructed response questions are fill-in-the-blank or sentence-
completion questions. For example, the question may take one of  the following forms:
1. Who was the president of  Pakistan in 1968?
2. The president of  Pakistan in 1968 was ________________________. 
Guidelines for writing simple sentence-completion questions
1. Construct your own sentences and questions.
2. Avoid taking questions out of  context by using sentences from textbooks.
3. Word the question so that only one answer is correct.
4. Make all of  the blanks of  equal length.
5. Place the blank near the end of  the statement or question.
6. Be sure the question is free of  grammatical clues.
7. Be sure there is only one answer and that it is factually correct.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
284
8. Most completion questions assess knowledge. 
9. The word that you omit to make a sentence-completion question should be 
significant to the meaning of  the question.
Short-answer questions 
Example:
 What is the main purpose of  formative assessment in the classroom?
1. Short-answer questions assess knowledge and comprehension.
2. Write the question so that the only one answer is correct.
3. Write the question so the answer is brief.
4. Construct your own questions. Avoid questions taken directly from a 
textbook.
5. Use words in the question that you know students understand. 
6. Make it clear to students that the answer is brief.
7. Make sure that the space allocated for the answer is consistent with the length 
of  the answer.
NOTE: Sentence-completion questions have a one- to three-word answer written in the one 
blank in the sentence. Short-answer questions may have a one- to three-sentence answer. 
Essay questions
1. Many education-measurement specialists believe that essay questions 
should be restricted to those learning outcomes that cannot be measured 
satisfactorily by objective test questions.
2. Essay questions on a test are designed to assess students’ ability to 
communicate what they know and how they think on particular topics in 
subjects they study in school.
3. Good performance on an essay question depends on writing ability .
4. If  essay tests are to be used, students need to be taught how to plan and write 
essays within restricted time limits.
5. It is important to write the essay question so that the student’s writing task is 
clearly indicated.
285
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
6. Essay questions are either restricted-response or extended-response questions. 
 Example of  restricted-response essay question:
 Why is the barometer a useful instrument for forecasting weather? Answer in 
a brief  paragraph.
 Example of  extended-response essay question:
 We learned during class that some natural resources are renewable and others 
are not. 
 In two pages, defend the importance of  conserving natural resources in our 
everyday lives.
 Make sure to include the following in your answer:
•	 Definition of  natural resources
•	 At least three different arguments for the importance of  conservation of  
natural resources in our everyday lives
•	 At least three different ways we can conserve natural resources
7. Restricted-response essay questions should be framed in a way to provide 
students with boundaries for their responses. For example, rather than a 
question that asks ‘explain the workings of  the digestive system’, a better 
question would be ‘in one page, explain the role of  the large intestine in the 
digestion process’. The first example does not provide students with definite 
boundaries, whereas the second example clearly outlines the boundaries 
for the student response. Because the digestive system is very complex and 
cannot be explained in its entirety using the restricted-response question, it 
is important to restrict students’ responses to only one or two aspects of  the 
whole system.
8. When writing extended-response essay questions, it is important to provide 
the students with the background information or a scenario for the question, 
state the question clearly , and then provide directions about material to be 
addressed in the question. 
9. Students should be told the approximate amount of  time required to answer 
each essay question.
10. Avoid presenting students with a choice of  essay questions in a test. 
11. Essay questions are scored using a rubric.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
286
Adapted from:  
G. D. Borich, Effective Teaching Methods: Research-based Practice, 6th ed. (Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Pearson, 2007), 405–413.
J. Chappuis, R. Stiggins, S. Chappuis, and J. Arter, Classroom Assessment for Student 
Learning: Doing It Right–Using It Well, 2nd ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson, 2012), 
123–189. 
J. H. McMillan, Classroom Assessment: Principles and Practice for Effective Standards-
based Instruction , 5th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson, 2011), 172–218.
M. D. Miller, R. L. Linn, and N. E. Gronlund, Measurement and Assessment in Teaching, 
11th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson, 2013).
C. S. Taylor and S. B. Nolen, Classroom Assessment: Supporting Teaching and Learning in 
Real Classrooms (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson, 2005), 190–229. 
287
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 4, week 12, session 3
Sample questions: Student T eacher copy
True-false questions
Directions 
Write ‘T’ for the true statement and ‘F’ for the false statement in the space provided in 
front of  the question.
W eak illustration 
______ The line drawn from the North Pole to the South Pole of  the Earth is called 
the axis. 
Improved illustration
______ The imaginary line drawn from the North Pole to the South Pole of  the Earth 
is called the axis. 
Multiple-choice questions
Directions
Circle the best answer for the question statement.
W eak illustration
What is one complete movement cycle of  the Earth around itself  called?
 a.   Revolution
 b.   The movement of  the Earth around itself  is called a rotation
 c.   One complete cycle of  the Earth around itself  is called a vibration
 d.   It is called oscillation
Improved illustration 
What is one complete movement cycle of  the Earth around itself  called?
 a.   Revolution
 b.   Rotation
 c.   Vibration
 d.   Oscillation
S
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
288
Matching questions
W eak illustration 
Please match the words in column A to their correct descriptions in column B. Place 
the letter for the description next to the correct word in column A. You may choose 
an option more than once or not at all. 
Column A  Column B
1.   Earth ___  a.   Smallest in size of  the Sun, Earth, and Moon
2.   Orbit ___  b.   Path of  a celestial body as it goes around another body
3.   Sun ___  c.   Imaginary line going through the centre of  the Earth
4.   Axis ___  d.   Spins around the Sun
5.   Moon ___  e.   Farthest planet from the Sun
   f.   Centre of  the solar system 
Improved illustration
Please match the names of  the Moon phases listed in column A to their definitions 
listed in column B. Place the letter for the definition next to the correct phase name in 
column A. You can use an option more than once or not at all.
 
Column A  Column B
1.   First quarter ___ a. The Moon is between the Earth and the Sun
2.   New Moon ___ b. The Moon is at a 90-dgree angle with the Earth and the Sun
3.   Last quarter ___ c. The Earth is between the Sun and the Moon
4.   Full Moon ___ d. The Moon is at a 45-degree angle with the Earth and the Sun
   e. The Moon is at a 120-degree angle with the Earth and the Sun
Completion questions
Directions
Answer the following question by completing the blank. 
W eak illustration 
Which phenomenon causes the Earth’s movement? ____________
Improved illustration
Which phenomenon is caused by one complete spin of  the Earth around its 
own axis? ____________
289
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Short-answer questions
W eak illustration 
How do we know that Earth is a sphere? ___________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
Improved illustration 
In two to three sentences, describe one observation that illustrates the fact that the 
Earth is a sphere. _____________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
Essay questions
Restricted-response essay question
W eak illustration 
What would happen if  the Earth stopped moving suddenly?
Improved illustration 
What would happen if  the Earth suddenly stopped moving? Name at least one 
phenomenon related to the movement of  the Earth that would change and explain 
how it would change. Restrict your answer to one page.
Extended-response essay question
W eak illustration
What will happen if  suddenly the Earth moved away from the Sun?
Improved illustration 
In our lesson about the solar system, you have learned that the Earth is about 100 
Sun diameters away from the Sun. Describe what will change or not change if  the 
Earth moved farther away from the Sun. Describe and explain the changes to natural 
phenomena caused by Earth’s increased distance from the Sun in one to two pages. 
Make sure to include the following in your answer:
•	 Description of  the phenomena that in your opinion will not be affected by the 
change in the Earth’s position
•	 Description of  the phenomena that in your opinion will change due to change 
in the Earth’s position
•	 Explanation of  what and how these changes will occur 
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
290
Unit 4, week 12, session 3
Sample questions: Instructor key
True-false questions
Directions 
Write ‘T’ for the true statement and ‘F’ for the false statement in the space provided in 
front of  the question.
W eak illustration 
______ The line drawn from the North Pole to the South Pole of  the Earth is called 
the axis. 
Improved illustration
______ The imaginary line drawn from the North Pole to the South Pole of  the Earth 
is called the axis. 
Explanation
The first question is a weaker option because it is not definitely true and there is an 
element of  doubt in it. The line in the question could mean a physical line, which 
makes the statement confusing. Adding the word imaginary before line removes the 
uncertainty from the second questions and makes it clearer. 
Multiple-choice questions
Directions
Circle the best answer for the question statement.
W eak illustration
What is one complete movement cycle of  the Earth around itself  called?
 a.   Revolution
 b.   The movement of  the Earth around itself  is called a rotation
 c.   One complete cycle of  the Earth around itself  is called a vibration
 d.   It is called oscillation
Improved illustration 
What is one complete movement cycle of  the Earth around itself  called?
 a.   Revolution
 b.   Rotation
 c.   Vibration
 d.   Oscillation
Explanation
The first question is a weak illustration because the response choices do not follow a 
parallel structure or form and are of  different lengths. The second question is a better 
option because the responses are of  the same length and form. The response sentences 
do not need to be exactly the same length but huge discrepancies (such as one response 
sentence having 3 words and the other one having 10 words) should be avoided. 
F
291
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Matching questions
W eak illustration 
Please match the words in column A to their correct descriptions in column B. Place 
the letter for the description next to the correct word in column A. You may choose 
an option more than once or not at all. 
Column A  Column B
1.   Earth ___  a.   Smallest in size of  the Sun, Earth, and Moon
2.   Orbit ___  b.   Path of  a celestial body as it goes around another body
3.   Sun ___  c.   Imaginary line going through the centre of  the Earth
4.   Axis ___  d.   Spins around the Sun
5.   Moon ___  e.   Farthest planet from the Sun
   f.   Centre of  the solar system 
Improved illustration
Please match the names of  the Moon phases listed in column A to their definitions 
listed in column B. Place the letter for the definition next to the correct phase name in 
column A. You can use an option more than once or not at all. 
Column A  Column B
1.   First quarter ___ a. The Moon is between the Earth and the Sun
2.   New Moon ___ b. The Moon is at a 90-degree angle with the Earth and the Sun
3.   Last quarter ___ c. The Earth is between the Sun and the Moon
4.   Full Moon ___ d. The Moon is at a 45-degree angle with the Earth and the Sun
   e. The Moon is at a 120-degree angle with the Earth and the Sun
Explanation
The first question is a weak illustration because the list for matching questions is not 
homogenous; rather, it is a random collection of  celestial bodies and concepts related 
to these bodies. The second question fixes this problem by providing students with a 
list of  phases of  the Moon and their definitions.
Completion questions
Directions
Answer the following question by completing the blank. 
W eak illustration 
Which phenomenon causes the Earth’s movement? ____________
Improved illustration
Which phenomenon is caused by one complete spin of  the Earth around its 
own axis? ____________
Explanation 
The first question is weak because it is vague and has multiple correct answers. The 
second question is a better illustration because it precisely tests students’ knowledge 
about the causes of  day and night.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
292
Short-answer questions
W eak illustration 
How do we know that Earth is a sphere? ___________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
Improved illustration 
In two to three sentences, describe one observation that illustrates the fact that the 
Earth is a sphere. _____________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________
Explanation
The first question is a weak illustration because it is vague, as students can come up 
with several scenarios that illustrate the fact that the Earth is a sphere. The second 
question is better because it gives students more specific directions about how to 
answer the question.
Essay questions
Restricted-response essay question
W eak illustration 
What would happen if  the Earth stopped moving suddenly?
Improved illustration 
What would happen if  the Earth suddenly stopped moving? Name at least one 
phenomenon related to the movement of  the Earth that would change and explain 
how it would change. Restrict your answer to one page.
Explanation 
The first question is weak because it does not provide students with boundaries, and 
thus it can easily be treated as an extended-response question. The second illustration 
restricts students’ responses to a certain length by providing them with boundaries. 
293
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Extended-response essay question
W eak illustration
What will happen if  suddenly the Earth moved away from the Sun?
Improved illustration 
In our lesson about the solar system, you have learned that the Earth is about 100 
Sun diameters away from the Sun. Describe what will change or not change if  the 
Earth moved farther away from the Sun. Describe and explain the changes to natural 
phenomena caused by Earth’s increased distance from the Sun in one to two pages. 
Make sure to include the following in your answer:
•	 Description of  the phenomena that in your opinion will not be affected by the 
change in the Earth’s position
•	 Description of  the phenomena that in your opinion will change due to change 
in the Earth’s position
•	 Explanation of  what and how these changes will occur 
Explanation
The first question is a weak illustration because it does not set the proper context for the 
students and does not provide them with appropriate guidance for a strong response.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
294
Unit 4, week 12, session 3
Question-writing exercise
Directions for Student T eachers
After carefully studying the ‘Guidelines for Writing Test Questions’ document and the 
strong and weak illustrations for different questions types (contained in the ‘Sample 
Questions’ document), read the following two texts and use the contents to write 
your own questions. 
Write one item for each question type—multiple-choice, true-false, sentence-
completion (fill-in-the-blank), and short-answer questions—in each learning category 
(knowledge, comprehension, and application). This means that you should have four 
questions for every learning category and 12 questions in total. 
NOTE: You do not need to write weak illustrations for the questions. Write only one strong 
illustration for each question type in each learning category.
Content information
Please use the information from the following two articles to write your questions. 
One of  the articles describes the causes of  monsoons, and the other outlines general 
climate conditions in Pakistan. 
The article ‘What Causes Monsoons’ can be found at:
 Ø http://www .buzzle.com/articles/what-causes-monsoons.html
The article about the climatic conditions in Pakistan can be found below . 
Pakistan’s climate
Pakistan lies in the temperate zone. The climate is generally arid, characterized by 
hot summers and cool or cold winters, and wide variations between extremes of  
temperature at given locations. There is little rainfall. These generalizations should 
not, however, obscure the distinct differences existing among particular locations. For 
example, the coastal area along the Arabian Sea is usually warm, whereas the frozen 
snow-covered ridges of  the Karakoram Range and of  other mountains of  the far 
north are so cold year round that they are only accessible by world-class climbers for a 
few weeks in May and June of  each year.
Pakistan has are four seasons: a cool, dry winter from December through February; 
a hot, dry spring from March through May; the summer rainy season, or southwest 
monsoon period, from June through September; and the retreating monsoon period 
of  October and November. The onset and duration of  these seasons vary somewhat 
according to location.
S
295
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
The climate in the capital city of  Islamabad varies from an average daily low of  2° C 
in January to an average daily high of  40° C in June. Half  of  the annual rainfall occurs 
in July and August, averaging about 255 millimeters in each of  those two months. The 
remainder of  the year has significantly less rain, amounting to about 50 millimeters 
per month. Hailstorms are common in the spring.
Pakistan’s largest city , Karachi, which is also the country’s industrial center, is more 
humid than Islamabad but gets less rain. Only July and August average more than 25 
millimeters of  rain in the Karachi area; the remaining months are exceedingly dry . 
The temperature is also more uniform in Karachi than in Islamabad, ranging from an 
average daily low of  13° C during winter evenings to an average daily high of  34° C 
on summer days. Although the summer temperatures do not get as high as those in 
Punjab, the high humidity causes the residents a great deal of  discomfort.
Most areas in Punjab experience fairly cool winters, often accompanied by rain. Woolen 
shawls are worn by women and men for warmth because few homes are heated. By mid-
February the temperature begins to rise; springtime weather continues until mid-April, 
when the summer heat sets in. The onset of  the southwest monsoon is anticipated to 
reach Punjab by May , but since the early 1970s the weather pattern has been irregular. The 
spring monsoon has either skipped over the area or has caused it to rain so hard that floods 
have resulted. June and July are oppressively hot. Although official estimates rarely place 
the temperature above 46° C, newspaper sources claim that it reaches 51° C and regularly 
carry reports about people who have succumbed to the heat. Heat records were broken in 
Multan in June 1993, when the mercury was reported to have risen to 54° C. In August the 
oppressive heat is punctuated by the rainy season, referred to as barsat, which brings relief  
in its wake. The hardest part of  the summer is then over, but cooler weather does not 
come until late October.
Source: Peter Blood, ed., Pakistan: A Country Study (Washington: GPO for the Library 
of  Congress, 1994). Retrieved 19 November, 2012.
 Ø http://countrystudies.us/pakistan/25.htm
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
296
# Student 
1
3
4
6
7
17
18
19
20
22
23
24
26
27
28
31
1 A.A. 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 1
2 C.A. 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0
3 K.H. 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
4 M.H. 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 1
5 A.K. 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
6 L.K. 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1
7 U.K. 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1
8 Z.K. 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0
9 M.K. 1 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1
10 A.K. 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 0 1
11 P .K. 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1
12 L.K. 1 1 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1
13 A.K. 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
14 M.M. 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 1
15 L.M. 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
16 F .M. 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1
17 M.M. 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1
18 O.M. 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0
19 P .M. 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1
20 N.N. 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 1
21 M.N. 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
22 P .N. 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 1
23 Z.N. 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1
24 F. T. 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1
25 P. T 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
26 Q.T . 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 1
27 S. T. 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0
28 T. T. 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 0 1
29 A.W . 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1
30 C . W. 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 0
31 Z.W . 1 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0
Sum 29 22 23 19 20 25 25 21 25 27 25 24 29 23 20 25
Unit 4, week 14, session 1
Assessment tracker 
‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’ unit test—Data for item analysis
SF
Knowledge
297
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
# Student
2
5
10
13
16
30
34
35
8
9
11
12
14
15
21
25
29
32
33 Totals
1 A.A. 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 30
2 C.A. 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 30
3 K.H. 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 25
4 M.H. 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 26
5 A.K. 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 31
6 L.K. 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 25
7 U.K. 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 24
8 Z.K. 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 26
9 M.K. 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 20
10 A.K. 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 0 26
11 P .K. 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 0 26
12 L.K. 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 26
13 A.K. 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 23
14 M.M. 1 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 23
15 L.M. 1 1 1 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 23
16 F .M. 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 25
17 M.M. 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 29
18 O.M. 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 1 24
19 P .M. 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 0 24
20 N.N. 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 0 1 0 22
21 M.N. 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 23
22 P. N . 1 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 23
23 Z.N. 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 0 22
24 F. T. 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 27
25 P. T 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 27
26 Q. T. 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 23
27 S. T. 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 26
28 T. T. 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 17
29 A.W . 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 0 1 29
30 C . W. 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 18
31 Z.W . 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 18
Sum 25 17 25 18 26 21 14 25 4 5 23 21 24 24 25 23 20 18 20
 Comprehension  Application
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
298
Unit 5, week 15, session 1 
Sample lesson plans with embedded 
assessment plans
Lesson plan examples from English and mathematics 
This document outlines interactive, hands-on lesson plans in English and mathematics. 
These lesson plans are to serve as examples for Student Teachers on how to create 
assessment-embedded, interactive lessons in subjects other than science. 
Task for Student Teachers
Student Teachers should study these lesson plans in detail with one or two partners 
and take some time to discuss:
•	 What are the differences between a learning objective, assessment target, and 
success criteria?
•	 Do you understand that all learning objectives do not become learning targets? 
Why?
•	 Can you explain to each other what success criteria means?
•	 Do the lesson plans adequately cover the learning objectives, learning targets, 
and success criteria of  the lesson?
¡¡ If  not, what needs to be changed in the lesson plan or the learning 
objectives, learning targets, and success criteria?
•	 Is there a need to change the formative assessments to more accurately match the 
success criteria of  the lesson? If  yes, what change or changes need to be made?
After the discussion, each Student Teacher needs to pick a subject and topic and create 
an assessment-embedded lesson plan for that topic.
Student Teachers should use the lessons below as models/examples to complete 
this task. Lessons from the ‘Sun, Earth, and the Moon’ unit can also be used as 
models/examples.
S
299
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
English literacy lesson plan: Homophones
Grades: 4 to 5
Time: 1 to 2 class periods
Learning objectives
•	 Students will be able to define the word homophone
•	 Students will be able to recognize commonly used homophones
•	 Students will be able to give examples of  homophones.
Learning targets
•	 Students will be able to define the word homophone
•	 Students will be able to give examples of  homophones.
Success criteria
•	 Students will recall and write the definition of  homophone and give at least 
three examples. 
•	 Students will act out pairs of  homophones and try to guess the homophones 
being acted out. 
•	 Students will draw a short cartoon strip to show the difference between a set of  
homophones.
Vocabulary
homophones
Materials required
•	 Chart paper
•	 Coloured pencils or crayons
•	 Index cards or pieces of  paper with one pair of  homophones written on them 
Introduction (connections to prior knowledge)
Tell the students that in this lesson they will learn about homophones. You can use 
the following questions to help the students understand the concept of  homophones 
and check their previous knowledge.
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
300
Guiding questions
Tell the students, ‘Let’s take the word homophone apart’. Ask the students the 
following questions:
•	 What are two words it is made of ? (Homo and phone.)
•	 What is the meaning of  homo?  (‘Same’.)
•	 What is the meaning of  phone? (Phone is also part of  the word telephone, and it 
means ‘sound’.)
•	 So now can someone guess the meaning of  the word homophone? (‘Same sound’.)
Take a few responses from the students and write them down on the board. 
Now using students’ responses as much as possible, write the definition of  homophone 
on the board: ‘Homophones are words that sound the same but have different spelling 
and meanings’.
Ask the students if  they can come up with a few examples of  homophones from their 
daily lives. Take a few responses and write them down on the board.
Exploration 1
Tell the students that they will watch the video ‘Homophones’, which features a song 
about homophones.
You can find the song on the PBS website at:
 Ø http://pbskids.org/lions/parentsteachers/lionstogo/video_music.html
NOTE: Download the ‘Music Video Mix 2’. Stop the video after the first song, ‘Homophones’. 
The video can be downloaded ahead of time.
Ask students to listen to the song carefully and write down in their English literacy 
notebooks as many pairs of  homophones as they can.
Play the song again if  needed. 
After watching the video, ask a few volunteers from the class to come to the board 
and write one pair of  homophones from the video and their meaning.
Ask the students to note all the pairs of  homophones that were in the video in their 
English literacy notebooks.
301
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Exploration 2
Formative assessment
Divide the students into groups of  two and tell them that in this activity they will act 
out a pair of  homophones.
Give each group an index card with a pair of  homophones written on it. Each student 
in the pair will act out one of  the words, and the rest of  the class will guess the pair of  
homophones the group acts out.
For example, if  a group is given the pair ‘eight and ate’, one person could count on 
her fingers to eight and other person could mime the eating action.
Allow the group five minutes to prepare.
After five minutes, each group comes to the front of  the class one by one and acts out 
their pair of  homophones.
The rest of  the class guesses which pair of  homophones the group acted out.
Now ask the class to take out their English literacy notebooks and write the definition 
of  the word homophone in their own words.
You can use the following list of  homophones for this activity or come up with your own.
List of  some commonly used homophones:
Red   Read
Two  To
I  Eye
Brake  Break
Cell  Sell
Dear  Deer
Weak  Week
For  Four
Heal  Heel
Whole  Hole
Knot  Not
Know  No
Meet  Meat
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
302
Exploration 3
Tell the students that in this activity they will draw the pair of  homophones they acted 
out in the previous activity .
Give each student chart paper and at least three different coloured pencils or crayons. 
Students who are sitting at the same table can share the coloured pencils or crayons.
Tell the students that they should make a cartoon drawing of  each word in the pair of  
homophones that they acted out in front of  the class.
Formative assessment
The students should add short dialogues or descriptions to the drawings that explain 
the meaning of  each word in the homophone pair.
Give students time to draw their cartoons and collect these drawings for formative 
assessment of  students’ understanding of  homophones.
Culminating activity
Formative assessment
The students should also write at least three examples of  homophones they have not 
come across in this lesson.
Ask a few volunteers to share their definitions and examples with the rest of  the class.
Write the definition and a few examples on the board and ask the students to check 
their work and correct it with coloured pen (using a different colour than their 
original responses), if  needed.
Collect students’ notebooks at the end of  the lesson to make sure that they have listed 
correct examples of  homophones. 
Source 
The lesson plan is adapted from S. Dennis-Shaw , ‘To, Too, or Two: Developing an 
Understanding of  Homophones’, International Reading Association/National Council 
of  Teachers of  English. Retrieved 26 January , 2013. 
 Ø http://www .readwritethink.org/classroom-resources/lesson-plans/developing- 
 understanding-homophones-284.html
303
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Math lesson plan: Odd eyes, even eyes?
Grade level: 1 to 2
Time: 1 to 2 class periods
Learning objectives
•	 Children will recognize odd and even numbers.
•	 Children will understand the difference between odd and even numbers.
•	 Children will recognize different patterns associated with odd and even numbers.
Learning targets
•	 Children will understand the difference between odd and even numbers.
•	 Children will recognize different patterns associated with odd and even numbers.
Success criteria:
•	 Children will be able to recognize a number as odd or even.
•	 Children will be able to name the next odd or even number in the series.
Vocabulary
even, odd, pair
Materials required
•	 Drawing paper
•	 Markers
•	 One cup containing 20 buttons (or small stones or beans) for each pair of  children 
•	 Coloured pencils for drawing
Introduction (connections to prior knowledge)
Initiate a class discussion to check how much children know about odd and even 
numbers and if  they are familiar with the vocabulary used in the lesson. The teacher 
can use the following guiding exercise to carry out the discussion.
Guiding exercise
Make two columns on the board. Label one as ‘odd’ and the other as ‘even’. Now call 
out a random number and ask children if  the number is odd or even. 
Ask children why they think the number is odd or even, then write the number in its 
appropriate column.
Listen to the reasons given for whether or not the number is odd or even. 
COURSE RESOURCES:  Classroom Assessment
304
Continue to call out numbers until all numbers from 1 to 10 are in one or other column.
This exercise will give the teacher an idea of  how much children already know about 
odd and even numbers. 
Exploration 1
Ask eight children to come to the front of  the class. Ask children to find a partner and 
hold their hand. Ask: How many children are here? Can everyone find a partner? 
Now ask one more child to come to the front of  the class. Ask the children to find a partner 
and hold their hand. Ask: How many children are here? Can everyone find a partner?
Help children understand that even numbers can be divided by two with nothing left over.
Exploration 2
Ask children to work with a partner. Ask them to look at both lists of  even and odd 
numbers they just made. Ask them: Can you see any patterns?
 
Each group should come up with patterns for even and odd numbers.
Give children a few minutes to find patterns and then invite responses from children. 
Write these down on the board.
Children might come up with following two patterns:
•	 For both even and odd numbers, you have to skip a number to come up with 
the next number on the list. 
•	 For both even and odd numbers, two is added to each number to come up with 
the next number.
Ask, ‘Which number would come in the even number list after 10?’
Take a volunteer from the class for each number and continue until you get into 
double digits (12, 14, 16 …). Twenty would be a good number to stop at. 
Children should understand that the pattern of  0, 2, 4, 6, and 8 continues into double digits.
Ask, ‘Which number would come in the even number list after nine?’
Take a volunteer from the class for each number and continue until you get into 
double digits (12, 14, 16 …). Stop at 19. 
Children should understand that the pattern of  1, 3, 5, 7, and 9 continues into double digits.
305
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Exploration 3
Divide children into groups of  two or three and distribute a cup of  20 buttons, chart 
paper, and markers to each group.
Ask children to draw a simple circular face without eyes. Ask each group to draw 
10 faces without eyes. Tell children that they will be using buttons as eyes and they 
should only use the number of  eyes called out by the teacher.
Tell children to use buttons to put eyes onto six faces. Ask: How many buttons did 
they use? Do they have any left over? Is 12 an even number or an odd number?
Ask children to remove all the eyes from the faces. 
Tell children to use buttons to put eyes onto nine faces. Ask: How many buttons did 
they use? Do they have any left over? Is 12 an even number or an odd number?
Circulate among the groups to see how children are working and if  they need any guidance.
Now ask the children to collect 11 buttons. How many faces can they make? Do they 
have any leftover buttons? Is 11 an odd number or an even number?
Now ask children to collect 15 buttons. How many faces can they make? Do they have 
any leftover buttons? Is 15 an odd number or an even number?
Repeat these steps a few more times for extra practice.
Culminating activity
Formative assessment
Show children pictures of  objects or shapes (for example, 9 triangles, 6 flowers, and 17 
circles). Ask if  they are odd or even numbers of  objects.
Formative assessment 
Write an odd number between 1 and 20 on the blackboard. Ask: What is the next odd 
number? Write an even number between 1 and 20 on the blackboard. Ask: What is the 
next even number?
Source 
This lesson plan is adapted from Dena Reid, ‘ An Odd Pair of  Eyes’, Beacon Lesson 
Plan Library . Retrieved 22 January , 2013.
 Ø http://www .beaconlearningcenter.com/Lessons/11743.htm

