Classroom 
Management
COURSE GUIDE
Associate Degree in Education/
B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary
2012
semester     2
This product has been made possible by the support of  the American People through the United States Agency for
International Development (USAID). The contents of  this report are the sole responsibility of  the authors, and do 
not necessarily reflect the views of  USAID or the United States Government.
Technical Support: Education Development Centre (EDC); Teacher’s College, Columbia University

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
ii
Foreword
Teacher education in Pakistan is leaping into the future. This updated Scheme of  Studies is the latest 
milestone in a journey that began in earnest in 2006 with the development of  a National Curriculum, 
which was later augmented by the 2008 National Professional Standards for Teachers in Pakistan and 
the 2010 Curriculum of  Education Scheme of  Studies.  With these foundations in place, the Higher 
Education Commission (HEC) and the USAID Teacher Education Project engaged  faculty across the 
nation to develop detailed syllabi and course guides for the four-year B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary and 
two-year Associate Degree in Education (ADE). 
The syllabi and course guides have been reviewed by the National Curriculum Review Committee 
(NCRC) and the syllabi are approved as the updated Scheme of  Studies for the ADE and B.Ed. (Hons) 
Elementary programs. 
As an educator, I am especially inspired by the creativity and engagement of  this updated Scheme of  
Studies. It offers the potential for a seismic change in how we educate our teachers and ultimately our 
country’s youngsters. Colleges and universities that use programs like these provide their students 
with the universally valuable tools of  critical thinking, hands-on learning, and collaborative study .
I am grateful to all who have contributed to this exciting process; in particular the faculty and staff  
from universities, colleges, and provincial institutions who gave freely of  their time and expertise for 
the purpose of  preparing teachers with the knowledge, skills, and dispositions required for nurturing 
students in elementary grades. Their contributions to improving the quality of  basic education in 
Pakistan are incalculable.  I would also like to thank the distinguished NCRC members, who helped 
further enrich the curricula by their recommendations.  The generous support received from the 
United States Agency for International Development (USAID) enabled HEC to draw on technical 
assistance and subject-matter expertise of  the scholars at Education Development Center, Inc., and 
Teachers College-Columbia University . Together, this partnership has produced a vitally important 
resource for Pakistan. 
 
 
PROF . DR. SOHAIL NAQVI,
Executive Director,
Higher Education Commission,
Islamabad.

HOW THIS COURSE GUIDE W AS DEVELOPED
iii
How this course guide was developed
As part of  nation-wide reforms to improve the quality of  teacher education, the 
Higher Education Commission (HEC) with technical assistance from the USAID 
Teacher Education Project engaged  faculty across the nation to develop detailed 
syllabi and course guides for the four-year B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary and two-year 
Associate Degree in Education (ADE). 
The process of  designing the syllabi and course guides began with a curriculum 
design workshop (one workshop for each subject) with faculty from universities 
and colleges and officials from provincial teacher education apex institutions. 
With guidance from national and international subject experts, they reviewed the 
HEC scheme of  studies, organized course content across the semester, developed 
detailed unit descriptions and prepared the course syllabi. Although the course 
syllabi are designed primarily for Student Teachers, they are useful resource for 
teacher educators too. 
In addition, participants in the workshops developed elements of  a course guide.  
The course guide is designed for faculty teaching the B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary 
and the ADE. It provides suggestions for how to teach the content of  each 
course and identifies potential resource materials. In designing both the syllabi 
and the course guides, faculty and subject experts were guided by the National 
Professional Standards for Teachers in Pakistan 2009 and the National Curriculum 
2006. The subject experts for each course completed the initial drafts of  syllabi 
and course guides.
Faculty and Student Teachers started using drafts of  syllabi and course guides and 
they provided their feedback and suggestions for improvement. Final drafts were 
reviewed and approved by the National Curriculum Review Committee (NCRC).

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
iv
The following faculty were involved in designing this course guide: Fizza Sabir, 
Fatima Jinnah Women University , Rawalpindi; Asma Idress Raja, Sardar Bahadur 
Khan Women University , Quetta; Muhammad Ismail Panhwar, Hyderabad; Semab 
Rafiq, BoC, Quetta; Imtiaz Bano, PITE Balochistan; Abdul Majeed, GCET (M) 
Faisalabad; Muhammad Arif, DCTE Abbottabad; Afzal Baig, GCET (M) Mirpur; 
Muhammad Nabi Khan, GCE (M) Gilgit; Dr. Abid Hussain, University of  the 
Punjab, Lahore; Dr. Abida Nasreen, University of  the Punjab, Lahore. 
Subject experts guiding course design: Dr. Margaret Jo Shepherd, Teachers College, 
Columbia University and Hareem Atif  Khan, consultant. 
Date of  NCRC review: 3 March 2012
NCRC Reviewers: Dr. James Shafi, Forman Christian College University; Dr. Uzma 
Quraishi, Lahore College for Women University; Dr. M. Asif  Malik, Government 
College University , Faisalabad.

T able of Contents
Syllabus  8
 
UNIT 1  Learning theories and classroom management 16
 
UNIT 2  Curriculum and classroom management 30
 
UNIT 3 Routines, schedules, and time management 34
 
UNIT 4 Creating shared values and community 37
 
UNIT 5 Course review 40
 Faculty resources 42 
 

Syllabus 
CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT
COURSE SYLLABUS:  Classroom Management 
09
CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT
Year/semester
Year 1, Semester 2
 
Credit value
3 credits
Prerequisites
Successful completion of semester 1 courses
Course description
One of  the foremost reasons cited for teacher burnout is the challenge of  classroom 
management. This comes as little surprise as classrooms are crowded, busy places 
in which students of  diverse backgrounds and learning styles must be organized, 
directed, and actively involved in learning. Many events need to occur simultaneously , 
and the course of  these events is often unpredictable. Teachers must react often and 
immediately to evolving problems and needs. Teaching in such settings requires a 
highly developed ability to manage people, space, time, and activity . 
A programme of  study that aims to prepare prospective teachers must, therefore, 
equip them with knowledge and strategies for becoming effective classroom manag-
ers. In its narrowest sense, classroom management is defined in terms of  disciplining 
and controlling students. However, this course places the goal of  student learning at 
the heart of  classroom management. That is, it views the best-managed classrooms 
as ones in which each learner is effectively engaged in constructing knowledge. To 
this end, teachers must manage teaching content, plan lessons, develop responsive 
instructional strategies, differentiate instruction, create predictable structures and 
routines, and connect learning to the real world outside the classroom. It also views 
the best-managed classrooms as learning communities with shared values of  respect 
and caring. 
In this course, prospective teachers will be encouraged to explore their own beliefs 
about teaching and learning to arrive at a philosophy of  classroom management that 
places learning as an ultimate goal. Prospective teachers will be given the chance to 
explore curricular concerns of  what to teach and how to teach it and to view lesson 
planning as the consequence of  these decisions. They will also study research and best 
practices on differentiation of  instruction, classroom structures, routines, procedures, 
and community building. 

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
10
Course outcomes
After completing this course, Student Teachers will be able to: 
•	 Define classroom management as a means to maximizing student learning
•	 Identify key features of  a well-managed classroom
•	 Plan lessons, activities, and assignments to maximize student learning
•	 Differentiate instruction according to student needs, interests, and levels
•	 Design and practise predictable classroom routines and structures to  
 minimize disruptions
•	 Plan for a culture of  caring and community in the classroom.
Learning and teaching approaches
This course assumes that prospective teachers will develop their own plans for class -
room management as a result of what they learn in this 16-week course.
This course relies on peer discussions, independent reflections, and class lectures. 
It also assumes that Student Teachers will read all the recommended text and ask 
provocative questions of themselves and during class. Students are expected to listen 
with tolerance to new points of view and contribute their understanding and experi -
ences during discussions.

COURSE SYLLABUS:  Classroom Management 
11
UNIT 1: Learning theories and classroom management (4 weeks/12 hours)
Week # T opics/themes
1
Why a course on classroom management? 
How does personal philosophy about teaching and learning affect beliefs about 
classroom management? 
What happens in a well-managed classroom?
2 Classroom observations and data collection (Students spend 6 hours in a class-
room including class and out-of-class hours.)
3
What are the features of  classroom management (e.g. physical environment, 
social environment)?
What challenges must teachers negotiate in the management of  a classroom?
How do classroom discipline and management differ?
What kind of  classroom environment do I want?
4
What do I need to think about in designing an effective classroom environment? 
•	 Identify	resources	for	learning.	
•	 Use	displays	and	visuals	to	enhance	the	learning	environment	in	 
the classroom.
•	 Arrange	seating	for	different	kinds	of	learning	experiences.
•	 Employ	physical	facilities	to	enhance	the	learning	environment.
•	 Build	the	social	environment.
Semester outline
1
UNIT 2: Curriculum and classroom management (4 weeks/12 hours)
Weeks # T opics/themes
5-8
How can my curriculum support classroom management?
In what ways can teachers create a plan for teaching and learning that is consistent  
with their philosophy? 
•	 Planning,	motivating,	teaching,	and	assessing	the	curriculum
•	 Differentiation	of 	instruction
•	 Multigrade	classrooms
•	 Overcrowded	classrooms
2

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
12
UNIT 3: Routines, schedules, and time management in diverse classrooms  
(3 weeks/9 hours)
Week # T opics/themes
9
What are classroom routines and structures? How do they help in the  
management of  classroom time?
How do you create structures and routines in a multigrade context?
How can routines and structures help me deal with special needs and situations?
10 How might routines and structures be used to teach specific subject content such 
as maths, science, or literacy?
11 How might routines and structures be used to promote co-operation and  
collaborative learning? 
UNIT 4: Creating shared values and community (2 weeks/6 hours)
Week # T opics/themes
12
What is community inside and outside the classroom and school?
What is community participation and involvement?
What are typical practices of  community participation?
13
How can I involve the community in my classroom?
What routines and structures need to be put in place for community 
involvement in schools and classrooms?
In what ways might community involvement be different in multigrade 
classroom?
14
How can I create an ethic of  care in my classroom?
•	 Diverse	classrooms	as	caring,	democratic	communities
•	 Respectful	relations	between	teacher	and	students	and	among	students	
15
How can a caring classroom help me build responsible actions and personal 
accountability?
What happens when behaviour breaks down?
How do I deal with unexpected events?
3
4

COURSE SYLLABUS:  Classroom Management 
13
UNIT 5: Course review
Week # T opics/themes
16
How can I use what I have learnt to create the classroom I want?
•	 Peer	critique	and	review	of 	final	projects
•	 Summary	and	close
Suggested resources
 
L. Canter, ‘Assertive Discipline: More than Names on the Board and Marbles in a Jar’ 
(publication date unknown) 
 Ø http:/ /campus.dyc.edu/~drwaltz/FoundLearnTheory/FLT_readings/Canter.
htm, accessed on 28 February 2011.
C. Evertson, I. Poole, the IRIS Center, Norms and Expectations 
 Ø http:/ /iris.peabody.vanderbilt.edu/instructors/guides/case_studies/ICS-003-
ICpdf, accessed 20 January 2011.
C. M. Evertson and E. T. Emmer, Classroom Management for Elementary Teachers  
(8th edn., Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson, 2009).
M.R. Henley, ‘Introduction to Proactive Classroom Management’, Classroom  
Management: A Proactive Approach (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson, 2009), Available at: 
 Ø http:/ /ptgmedia.pearsoncmg.com/images/9780135010631/downloads/Henley_
Ch1_IntroductiontoProactiveClassroomManagement.pdf
R. J. Marzano, J. S. Marzano, and D. Pickering, Classroom Management That Works: 
Research-Based Strategies for Every Teacher  (Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision 
and Curriculum Development, 2003). Available at: 
 Ø http://www.questia.com/library/119451162/
classroom-management-that-works-research-based-strategies
S. Vincent, The Multigrade Classroom: A Resource Handbook for Small Rural Schools – 
Book 3: Classroom Management and Discipline   (Portland, OR: Northwest Regional 
Educational Laboratory). Available at: 
 Ø http://educationnorthwest.org/webfm_send/1152
5
Note: The PDF versions of each of these books can be read online for free from the  
websites listed below.

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
14
Summary of essential knowledge 
Just as the goal of  managing a business is profit maximization, the goal of  managing 
a classroom is learning maximization. A classroom may appear to be operating 
effectively and in an organized manner, but if  all the students are not engaged in 
learning, this classroom is not well managed. In contrast, a classroom might appear to 
be chaotic, with noise and activity that make it difficult for the outside observer to tell 
what is going on. However, if  all the students are actively engaged in learning and can 
name what they are doing to learn, the classroom is probably well managed.
Classroom management involves decisions about what to teach and how to teach it. 
This is not simple. Every classroom has diverse learners. In order to reach every learn-
er at their level, the teacher has to differentiate instruction. Classroom management 
also involves rules, procedures, routines, timetables, and managing the physical and 
social environments. It also involves setting a protocol for acceptable behaviour and 
communicating effectively so that students are clear about what is expected of  them. 
There is a difference between extrinsic and intrinsic rewards. Extrinsic rewards are 
things given to a student such as a star, praise, tokens, stickers, or sweets. Intrinsic 
rewards are things that occur inside the individual such as pride, interest, and self-es-
teem. To give a learner intrinsic rewards is more difficult, but it is also more meaning-
ful and longer lasting.
Punishment and discipline are not the same thing. Discipline involves teaching right 
from wrong, and it includes methods to prevent or respond to behaviour problems so 
they do not occur in the future. 
Common misconceptions
•	 The	best-managed	classroom	is	one	in	which	the	teacher	(instead	of 	the	
student) is in control of  learning.
•	 The	quietest	classrooms	are	the	best	managed.
•	 The	goal	of 	classroom	management	is	peace	and	discipline.
•	 Classroom	management	relies	on	threats	and	punishment.
•	 Classrooms	are	homogeneous.
•	 Each	class	has	fixed	content	that	must	be	taught.
•	 The	same	content	must	be	taught	to	all	the	students	in	one	class.
 

COURSE SYLLABUS:  Classroom Management 
15
Sample assignments
1. Classroom management plan
Choose any subject/discipline and class, and create a classroom management plan. 
Your plan should highlight the following:
•	 details	of 	 your 	 classroom 	 management 	 philosophy 	 (e.g. 	 your 	 ideas 	 about 	 what 	 a 	
well-managed classroom is, what it should look and feel like)
•	 the	physical	layout	of 	 your 	 classroom 	 (Explain 	 why 	 you 	 chose 	 this 	 layout 	 and 	
whether you will vary it during the day or week.)
•	 rules	and	student	responsibilities
•	 routines/rituals	and	procedures
•	 activities	to	foster	a	community	and	an	environment	for	caring
•	 your	methods	for	dealing	with	disruptions
2. Multigrade classroom lesson plan
Choose a subject of  your liking and prepare a 60-minute lesson plan for a classroom 
that has children in classes 2–4.
You may use activity corners as well as multiple resources in the room to differentiate 
group tasks. Also, you can invite a community member/paraprofessional to speak.
Provide descriptive details of  your lesson and seating plan. For example, how would 
you differentiate instruction for the diverse learners in the room?

 UNIT     1 
 L EARNING THEORIES AND  
CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT

COURSE GUIDE:  Classroom Management
17
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Week 1
Week 1, Session 1
Introduction and welcome; pair-share activity (20 minutes)
Welcome Student Teachers to this course and introduce yourself.
Next, ask each Student Teacher to turn to the person seated next to them and intro-
duce themselves using the following prompts:
•	 My	name	is…
•	 I	want	to	be	a	teacher	because…
•	 My	most	memorable	moment	as	a	student	was…
Instruct students in each pair to listen to each other’s answers carefully , because they 
will introduce their partner to the rest of  the class.
After about five minutes, bring the class back together, and direct students to intro-
duce their partner to the rest of  the room.
Mini-lecture (10 minutes)
Elaborate on the following content in a mini-lecture:
•	 Research 	has	found	that	one	of 	the	biggest	r easons	that	man y	teacher s	lea ve	
their job in the first year is their frustration with classroom management. 
That is why this course is so important.
•	 Each 	Student	T eacher	has	come	to	this	class	with	their	own	beliefs	about	
what constitutes teaching and learning and what a well-managed classroom 
is. These beliefs are largely the result of  personal experiences with schools 
and classrooms throughout your own student life. In this course, you will 
examine your own beliefs, weigh them against research and best practices, 
reflect with your peers, and deliberate on a classroom management plan for 
yourselves. 
•	 This 	course	will	prepare	you	to	understand	the	challenges	you	are	likely	to	
face as a teacher in a classroom, and offer some strategies and examples of  
best practices to deal with these.
•	 If 	y ou 	w ere 	to	tr avel	to	dif ferent	er as	in	histor y	and	to	dif ferent	schools	
around the world to discover what exemplifies a well-managed classroom, 
you would likely find a range of  scenarios. The definition of  classroom man-
agement can be very subjective. Teacher-centred classrooms tend to define 
management in terms of  the teacher being in control, pin-drop silence, and 
students staying quiet unless asked to speak. Even though these classrooms 
appear to be well-managed and disciplined, we know that real learning can 
be noisy , that children need to interact with each other and with us to explore 
new ideas, that learning by doing means that children cannot sit still in one 
seat for the entire lesson, every day . 
•	 This 	course	will	emphasize	defining	classroom	management	in	the	context	of 	
positive student learning and productivity .

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
18
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
Group activity (30 minutes)
Tell Student Teachers that before we think about how teachers should teach or man-
age a classroom, we have to understand how learning actually takes place. 
Ask Student Teachers to retrieve paper and a pen. As they do this, write the following 
question on the board so everyone can see, ‘How do humans learn?’
 
Instruct Student Teachers to write their personal answer to this question and provide 
examples. At this stage offer no assistance or feedback, but reassure students that there 
can be no wrong answer. Remind them that scholars have been debating answers to 
this question since the time of  Plato and Socrates. Urge Student Teachers to write 
based on their own experiences of  learning a task or skill, a behaviour, or a way of  
thinking.
After about five minutes, divide the class into groups of  four students each. Ask 
Student Teachers to read aloud their thoughts on how humans learn to their group.
Direct each group to compile their collective ideas about how humans learn on paper. 
Inform them that they will need to bring this paper to the next session. Inform group 
members that they may continue to meet after class to add to and develop this list.
Week 1, session 2
Silent reading (10 minutes)
Ask the class to sit with their group from the previous session.
Distribute ‘How Do Humans Learn’ to each Student Teacher. Ask each Student 
Teacher to read this handout individually . Ensure absolute silence so that everyone 
may read the handout undisturbed. 
Group activity (20 minutes)
Once Student Teachers have had a chance to read the handout, direct groups to 
review their notes on how humans learn from the previous session. Ask groups to 
consider the following:
•	 How 	do	behaviourism,	cognitivism,	and	constructivism	differ	in	their	
approach to learning? Can you provide one example of  each?
•	 Do 	your	ideas	about	how	humans	learn	fit	with	any	of 	the	theories	described?	
Explain how .
•	 Do 	the	learning	theories	described	in	the	handout	make	you	think	of 	other	
possible ways that humans learn? Provide examples.
Whole-class discussion (20 minutes)
Direct a whole-class discussion in which you solicit Student Teachers’ thinking. Allow 
students to provide examples or ask clarifying questions, but emphasize the following 
points:

COURSE GUIDE:  Classroom Management
19
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
•	 Children 	learn	in	various	ways.	Behavioural,	cognitive,	and	constructivist	
approaches to learning all have certain validity in the classroom. Some tasks 
require rote memorization; others require complex thinking and higher 
mental processes. 
•	 Consider 	the	implications	this	has	for	teaching.	T eachers	must	create	a	variety	
of  learning opportunities for children. Some things can be taught through 
positive reinforcement; other lessons must be taught through discourse, 
through reflection, by structuring the classroom environment, by invoking 
prior experiences etc.
Assignment
Read H. K. Wong’s ‘The Well-Managed Classroom’ from H. K. Wong and R. T . Wong 
(eds.), The First Days of  School: How to Be an Effective Teacher (rev edn., Mountain View , 
CA: Harry K. Wong Publications, 1998). 
 Ø Available at: http://go.hrw .com/resources/go_sc/gen/HSTPR034.PDF
Week 1, session 3
Interactive lecture (15 minutes)
Discuss the concept of  classroom management.
Begin the lecture by telling Student Teachers that in the corporate world, the concept 
of  management is defined in terms of  output or productivity . That is, a manager of  
a company has to control, lead, monitor, organize, and plan activities associated with 
running a company – but the goal of  all these activities is high profits.
Pose the following question: What goal do teachers have in the classroom? Teachers 
control, lead, monitor, organize, and plan activities associated with running a class-
room, but what is the goal of  all these activities?
Once Student Teachers identify learning as the goal of  all classroom activities, sug-
gest that any definition of  classroom management must centre on student learning. 
Keeping this goal, of  learning in mind, ask Student Teachers to turn to the person 
seated next to them and construct a definition of  classroom management. 
Write the following thought prompts on the board and ask Student Teachers to pick 
any one to begin constructing their definitions:
•	 Classroom	management	is	a	process	that…
•	 Classroom	management	includes…
•	 Classroom	management	is	the	management	of 	…
Remind Student Teachers to mention the goal of  maximum student learning within 
their definitions.

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
20
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
Whole-class share (5 minutes)
Ask volunteers to read their definitions of  classroom management for the class to con-
sider. Meanwhile, you may also share the following definitions for Student Teachers to 
consider:
‘…process	of 	organizing	and	conducting	a	classroom	in	a	way	that	results	in	maxi-
mum student learning ...(preventing) distractions and disturbances’ (Callahan et al., 
1995, 209)1
‘…includes	time	management,	student	involvement,	student	engagement,	and	class-
room communication.’ (Farris, 1999, 372)2
Think, pair, share (30 minutes)
Ask class members to consider what a well-managed classroom look like. Prepare a 
handout to each Student Teacher with the following seven points on it (or write the 
seven points on the board): 
• Students 	are	clear	about	the	teacher’s	expectations	regarding	classroom	rules
and behaviour.
• The 	teacher	uses	a	variety	of 	teaching	methods
• Students 	desire	to	learn	and	are	actively	participating.	In	some	cases,	students
do more talking while teachers listen. (A well-managed classroom can actual-
ly seem chaotic at times when genuine learning is taking place.)
• Daily 	small	tasks	such	as	queuing,	collecting	homework,	and	taking	atten-
dance happen quickly and efficiently . The room is arranged in a way that
facilitates easy movement.
• Time 	is	well	managed.
• T eachers 	are	clear	about	what	to	teach,	how	to	teach	it,	and	how	to	assess
whether actual learning has taken place.
• T eaching 	reaches	every	child	in	the	room.	Actual	classrooms	have	children
who are ‘gifted’ as well as those who struggle. Teachers who plan only for
the ‘average’ student will end up ignoring many children in the room. The
best-managed classrooms are ones where all children are engaged in learning
that is appropriate for their level.
Instruct Student Teachers to read each point silently and write a possible example 
for each. After about 10 minutes, direct Student Teachers to turn to a person seated 
beside them and share their examples for each point. 
After another 10 minutes, draw the whole class’s attention and clarify each of  the 
seven points in a brief  lecture, eliciting responses and examples from Student Teachers 
to enrich discussion. 
1  J. Callahan, L. Clark, and R. Kelough, 
Teaching in the Middle and Secondary 
Schools (Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall, 1995). 
2 P . J. Farris, Teaching, Bearing the Torch 
(New York City, NY: McGraw-Hill College, 
1999).

COURSE GUIDE:  Classroom Management
21
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Assignment
Read the following articles:
•	 ‘Classroom 	Arrangement’,	
 Ø available from http://www.readingrockets.org/article/311/
•	 ‘5 	Characteristics 	of	a	Well-Managed	21st	Century	Classroom’,
 Ø available from http://teaching.monster.com/benefits/
articles/9724-5-characteristics-of-a-well-managed-21st-century-classroom
Week 2
Week 2, sessions 1 and 2
Designing tools to collect data about classroom management  
(one or two full sessions)
Explain that this week the focus will be on collecting data about classroom manage-
ment. Student Teachers will visit classrooms in practicum schools. (Try to arrange for 
Student Teachers to visit at least two classrooms so that they can compare their data.) 
They will use the first session this week to design data collection tools and to prepare. 
(Use two sessions if  needed.) They will use the third session to review and report back 
on the data they collected.
Ask students to work in pairs. 
Ask them to decide which aspect(s) of  classroom management they will collect data 
about. Examples include:
•	 the 	physical	arrangement	of 	 classroom 	 space
•	 the 	social	climate	(i.e.	how	teachers	and	students	address	each	other,	how	
children interact among themselves)
•	 the 	organization	of 	 activities 	 and 	 the 	 management 	 of 	 time
•	 the 	children’s	level	of 	 engagement 	 and 	 participation. 	
•	 behaviour 	(e.g.	Is	behaviour	positively	or	negatively	reinforced?).
When pairs have decided which aspect of  classroom management to investigate, ask 
them to design their data collection tool. Explain that collecting direct data involves a 
variety of  techniques. Discuss different methods available to students such as observa-
tion schedules, interviews, maps, sketches. When Student Teachers collect informa-
tion, they may need to use multiple sources and methods. 
Make sure you have examples of  such tools to share with students (there are examples 
in the Practicum Handbooks and the Teaching Methods course). Students could 
search the Internet for ‘classroom management observation tool’ for additional ideas.)

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
22
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
Help Student Teachers make their tools. Encourage them to think about whether 
their tools will help them collect the data they need, what type of  data they will 
collect, how they will record the data, and how they will analyse it.
Week 2, session 3
Student Teachers should bring the data they have collected to class. Ask them to 
continue to work in their pairs to analyse the data and to make some initial findings. If  
time allows, they can very briefly share their initial findings with the rest of  the class.
Ask students to continue the data analysis as part of  an assignment. They should 
prepare a brief  paper about: 
•	 what 	they	learned	about	the	classrooms	they	visited	
•	 the 	process	of 	data	collection.	(T hey	should	addr ess	w hether	the	tools	w ere	
useful, if  it was easy to collect data, whether they would change the tool if  
they were to use it again.)
Week 3
Week 3, session 1
Mini-lecture (5 minutes)
Provide a recap of  some of  the main points from the previous week’s lessons. Explain 
the following:
•	 Classroom 	management	neither	is	easy	nor	does	it	come	naturally .	
Classrooms are ever-changing spaces filed with many learners of  diverse 
backgrounds, learning cultures, and capacities.
•	 Some 	people	may	naturally	be	better	managers	because	of 	instinct	or	
experience, but even so, anyone who wants to be a teacher will benefit from 
studying best practices related to classroom management.
•	 With 	practice,	experience,	and	reflection,	teachers	can	improve	their	manage-
ment of  a classroom. According to Erik Erikson, humans are the ‘teaching 
species’.
Remind students of  an important point from the previous week’s discussion: Student 
learning is at the heart of  all classroom management. 
Whole-class discussion (15 minutes)
Ask students to consider what problems teachers might face in the classroom.
Advise class members to take a minute to think about this and to independently (and 
silently) write a quick list of  possible answers.

COURSE GUIDE:  Classroom Management
23
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
After a minute, invite students to share their thoughts. Acknowledge everything you 
hear and encourage all students to speak.
As the discussion continues, have a class member write these problems on a paper and 
post this on a wall in the classroom. (Ensure that this chart remains on this wall until 
the end of  this course.)
Explain that over the next 14 weeks students will consider content and points of  view 
that will help answer how these listed problems might be tackled. Ask them to keep 
a small notebook in which they reflect on these issues and note solutions to some of  
these problems and challenges.
Think, pair, share (20 minutes)
Display or print and distribute the Walter Doyle quotations listed below from his 
chapter ‘Classroom Management Techniques’ in Student Discipline Strategies—Research 
and Practice.3
Ask students to read the two quotations and answer the questions that follow . After 
about 10 minutes, ask students to turn to the person seated beside them and share 
their answers.
After another five minutes, invite the whole class to share their reaction to these 
quotations.
Quotation one:
Traditionally, ‘misbehaviour’ has been the dominant theme in discussions of  classroom 
management. This emphasis is understandable since the need for management and discipline 
is most apparent when students are misbehaving. Yet, order in classrooms is not a conse-
quence of  reactions to misbehaviour but a condition established and sustained by the way a 
teacher organizes and guides classroom activities and academic work. –Doyle, p. 114
Guiding questions for quotation one:
• What 	has	the	dominant	theme	in	classroom	management	been?	Accor ding	to
Doyle, does this theme hold true? Why or why not?
• According 	to	Doyle,	what	creates	‘order’	in	classrooms?	Do	you	agree	with
Doyle?
Quotation two:
Teachers must balance activity management with rule enforcement. Time taken to deal 
publicly with rule violations distracts attention away from main activities. And if  rule 
violations are frequent, misbehaviour, rather than academic work can become the operat-
ing curriculum in the class. For this reason, experienced teachers need to push ahead with 
activities and try to make reprimands brief  and private. –Doyle, p. 119
Guiding questions f
or quotation two:
• Why 	does	the	author	feel	that	a	reprimand	over	a	discipline	issue	ought	to	be
brief  and private?
3 W. Doyle, ‘Classroom Management 
T echniques’, in O. Moles (ed.), Student 
Discipline Strategies—Research and 
Practice (Albany, NY: State University of 
New York Press, 1990). 

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
24
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
•	 Do 	you	agree	with	the	author? 
Reflection activity (10 minutes + homework)
1) Think back to your own school life. Were you or someone you know ever   
disciplined or punished in class? What did you do wrong? What was the punish-
ment? How did you feel at the time? Looking back, how do you feel about the 
episode now?
2) After class, do an Internet search of  ‘positive discipline in the classroom’ and 
read whatever information you find from at least five different websites.  
Explain the concept of  ‘positive discipline’ in your own words.
3) In your opinion, why do discipline problems arise in classrooms?
Prepare a short report on these questions and tasks and be prepared to discuss them in 
the next session. 
Week 3, session 2
Assignment share and role play preparation (20 minutes) 
Divide students into groups of  four. Allow students about 10 minutes to share with 
their group their response to question 1 from the previous session’s reflection assign-
ment on punishment. 
Ask each group to pick one group member’s memory and practice role-playing it.
Role play and reflection (30 minutes)
Invite groups to role-play the memory of  the punishment in front of  the whole class. 
As they watch other groups perform their vignettes, ask students to respond to the 
following questions:
•	 Why 	is	the	child	being	punished?	What	is	the	offence?	What	might	have	
caused the child to behave in this way?
•	 Is 	this	an	example	of 	positive	or	negativ e	discipline?	
•	 Can 	this	method	of 	discipline	be	improved?	How?
After each group presents its vignette, invite the rest of  the class to spend about a few 
minutes discussing their responses.
Assignment
Read C. Dunbar, ‘Best Practices in Classroom Management ’, University Outreach & 
Engagement, Michigan State University (published October 2004) 
 Ø https://www .msu.edu/~dunbarc/dunbar3.pdf, accessed 11 February 2013.
Week 3, session 3
Lecture (20 minutes) 
In a lecture, elaborate on the features of  classroom management. Provide examples from 
real-life classrooms in your environment and invite questions to enrich your lecture.

COURSE GUIDE:  Classroom Management
25
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
The management of  a classroom requires a lot of  multi-tasking. These are some of  
the bigger things that teachers need to keep in mind:
•	 Curricular	concerns:	what	to	teach	and	how	to	teach	it?
 T eachers are often handed a prescribed textbook and told to cover its contents. 
This cannot mean rote memorization of  the content. Children need to under-
stand and internalize this content and be able to connect it with their world. To 
enable them to do this, teachers need to create teaching experiences (including 
lectures, activities, and discussions) that reach all the learners in the classroom. 
•	 Disparate	student	levels	and	backgrounds	(differentiating	instruction)
 R eaching every single learner in a classroom is difficult. This is because learners 
are so different: they have different backgrounds and capacities. Teachers need 
to create systems and practices that allow each and every child to learn (as 
opposed to only some children). This will require differentiating instruction 
according to the need of  each learner.
•	 Managing	a	large	number	of 	 learners 	 within 	 a 	 small 	 space
 A classroom – with usuall y one teacher and dozens of  learners confined to one 
room – is not a natural learning environment (e.g. for learning concepts of  
science or geography). This means teachers have to create a learning environ-
ment with the resources that they have. This requires setting up the classroom 
space so that co-operative learning can occur, students can be grouped and re-
grouped, and instruction can be responsive to individual needs. It also requires 
establishing rules for discipline. 
•	 Routines,	schedules,	and	time	management	
 Time management is a cr ucial component of  effective classroom management. 
Limited time each day must be divided for the completion of  various curricular 
and extracurricular tasks. Establishing predictable routines and schedules saves 
time, as does prior planning of  instruction.
•	 Developing	a	community	and	defining	values
 Ef fective teachers develop a sense of  community in the classroom. This means 
that students share a feeling of  fellowship with each other resulting from 
common attitudes, experiences, and values. These values should foster respect 
for each other and each other’s property , opinions, beliefs, and cultures. 
•	 The	world	around	the	classroom
 T his involves managing the classroom in terms of  the larger community in 
which it is situated. The classroom should involve parents, invite community 
support, and address the social issues that children encounter in their daily lives.
Thought paper (10 minutes) 
Direct students to create a written response to the following questions:
•	 Based	on	all	that	you’ve	learnt	in	the	previous	two	weeks,	how	has	your	under-
standing of  classroom management changed?  
•	 Why	do	you	think	it	is	so	crucial	to	keep	student	learning	at	the	heart	of 	
classroom management?

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
26
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
Poster activity (20 minutes)
Divide the class into groups of  four and give a chart paper to each group. Ask groups 
to create a visual representation of  classroom management. They only use illustra-
tions – no words allowed.
Invite groups to display their posters around the room. Have the class engage in a gal-
lery walk. One member of  each group should be near the group’s poster to answers 
questions about it. 
Week 4
Week 4, session 1
Quick sketch and discussion (15 minutes)
Read aloud the descriptive titles of  various seating plans for students. Ask class mem-
bers to make a rough sketch depicting each of  these seating arrangements. As you 
read each of  the following descriptions, give class members no more than 20 seconds 
to sketch: 
•	 the	U-shaped	seating	plan
•	 pairs	of 	desk s	ar ranged	in	ro ws
•	 single	desks	arranged	in	rows
•	 children	seated	in	a	closed	circle	on	the	floor
•	 four	or	five	chairs	around	a	cluster	of 	desk s,	with	se veral	desk	cluster s	in	one	
classroom 
•	 children	seated	on	a	floor	rug,	huddled	close	to	the	teacher	(i.e.	when	a	teacher	
shows them an object or reads a story)
•	 all	the	desks	joined	together	to	make	one	long	table,	with	students	seated	
around this (like a dining table).
Have class members work in pairs and discuss the kinds of  classroom activity each 
seating arrangement might be suitable for. (For example, a circle or U-shaped seating 
plan is ideal for whole-class discussions.) Invite students to share their responses with 
the whole class.
Lecture (20 minutes)
Deliver a brief  lecture on organizing a classroom’s physical space. Elaborate the 
following points:
•	 Some seating plans are more suited for certain classroom activities than 
others. Teachers can vary the seating plan according to the activity , for exam-
ple, ask four or five students to cluster their desks for a group activity . If  there 
is enough space in the classroom, they may have permanent areas for separate 
activities. For example, a rug in one corner of  the room could become the 

COURSE GUIDE:  Classroom Management
27
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
seating area for story time or circle time. 
•	 Whatever the physical layout of the classroom, it ought to enable the 
teacher to move freely between children and to be able to reach each child. 
An important aspect of  classroom management is proximity – the teacher must 
circulate in the classroom space so that in order to observe and assess each 
child’s work and provide individual instruction to each child. Proximity is an 
important element of  classroom management.
•	 Where a student sits in relation to other students and within a classroom 
space can affect learning. Teachers need to consider whether having certain 
students seated together is preventing them from interacting or collaborating 
with other students. Teachers may need to group and regroup students to 
maximize their interaction with a variety of  peers. Additionally , teachers must 
ensure that that they can see everyone – and that everyone can see the teacher. 
Seating arrangements for hearing-impaired or visually impaired students should 
also be considered, as these students may need to sit closer to the board. 
•	 The physical space of the classroom is itself a learning area. Teachers can 
fill this space with visuals and displays, create an environment rich with images 
and print, add ‘centres’ with stationery , crayons, paper, scissors, blocks, or other 
creative and learning tools, and keep varying these learning tools to engage 
learners.
Brainstorm and discussion (15 minutes)
Lead a whole-class brainstorm on low-cost/no-cost classroom materials that can be 
used to enhance the physical space of  a classroom. Invite students to think about 
some of  the practical ways that they might arrange the physical space in a classroom. 
Remind them, that the goal of  this arrangement is the same as the goal for classroom 
management: maximizing student learning.
Homework assignment 
Ask students to research the Reggio Emilia approach to education and to briefly 
explain this approach to the organization of  the physical classroom space in their own 
words. 
Week 4, session 2
Homework share (10 minutes)
Start the session by inviting students to share what they learnt about the Reggio 
Emilia approach to education. The Reggio Emilia philosophy is based upon the 
following set of  principles:
•	 Children 	must	have	some	control	over	the	direction	of 	their	lear ning.
•	 Children 	must	be	able	to	learn	through	experiences	of 	touching,	mo ving,	
listening, seeing, and hearing.
•	 Children 	have	a	relationship	with	other	children	and	with	material	items	in	
the world that children must be allowed to explore.
•	 Children 	must	have	endless	ways	and	opportunities	to	express	themselves.

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
28
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
The principles provide guidance on classroom management and can help teachers 
create learning environments.
Interactive lecture (25 minutes) 
Use an interactive lecture to explain the following points and ask questions about 
learning environments:
•	 Note 	that	the	physical	environment	of 	a	child	is	an	impor tant	r esource	f or	
learning. Ask students to suggest examples.
•	 A 	teacher	is	responsible	for	creating	a	specific	environment	in	the	classroom.	
How might the teacher create a classroom environment to facilitate learning? 
Elaborate and ask class members to give examples. 
•	 What 	social environment can a teacher create? How? Ask students to provide 
concrete examples of  how teachers can help students with the following: 
o conflict resolution
o learning sharing and collaboration
o working within a team 
o providing support and assistance to each other
•	 What 	intellectual environment can a teacher create? How? Ask students to 
provide concrete examples of  the expectations a teacher sets in terms of  the 
following:
o participation in class discussions,
o encouraging questions
o developing inquiries
o rewarding students for authentic ideas 
o monitoring that content is appropriatel y challenging for all learners
Behavioural classroom management (20 minutes)
Explain that managing physical space is only one aspect of  classroom management. 
Another is to use manage student behaviour. A proactive teacher does not wait until 
behaviour get out of  control. Instead, a proactive teacher takes preventive action 
against potential problems rather than waiting for the problem to occur and then 
reacting to it.
Ask students to work in pairs to brainstorm how the proactive teacher might prevent 
the following undesirable classroom behaviours: 
•	 students 	interrupting	you	while	you	are	talking
•	 students 	pushing	each	other	while	queuing	for	assembly
•	 students 	not	completing	assignments	on	time
•	 students 	not	attending	class
•	 students 	using	rude	language	with	each	other
Remind class members that teachers might use the physical space of  the classroom to 
prevent these behaviours.

COURSE GUIDE:  Classroom Management
29
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
After 10 minutes, ask each pair to work with another pair to form groups of  four. Ask 
each group to exchange proactive ideas. 
Week 4, session 3
Role-play activity (55 minutes)
Access five or six case studies from the Teacher Matters website: 
 Ø http://www .teachermatters.com/index.php?option=com_content&view= 
category&id=11&Itemid=12 
Another way to access this site is by typing ‘classroom management and discipline 
case studies’ into an Internet search engine or by accessing this page from the site’s 
home page, 
 Ø www .teachermatters.com.
Divide the class into five or six groups. Assign one case study to each group. Ask 
group members to role-play the classroom management problem as well as the 
solution detailed in the case study . 
Allow 15 minutes for groups to prepare their role plays. Then, spend the remainder of  
the class time in presenting these skits.
Homework assignment  
Ask students to write a one-page reflection that explains what they have learnt about 
classroom management from the skits they saw in class.

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
30
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
 UNIT     2 
CURRICULUM AND  
CLASSROOM MANAGEMENT

COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Management
31
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Good teachers, effective teachers, matter much more than particular curriculum materials, 
pedagogical approaches, or “proven programs”. –Richard Allington4
Unit introduction
Teachers tend to think of  curriculum as something entirely separate from classroom 
management. In fact, many of  the managerial issues that surface in classrooms, 
such as lack of  attentiveness and engagement, incompletion of  assignments, and 
disruption, occur because of  curricular weaknesses. If  the taught content is too easy 
or too difficult, if  it is contextually irrelevant to students’ lives and their world, or 
if  it is taught in a way that fails to motivate or rouse interest, students will remain 
disengaged. And disengaged students are more apt to act in ways that pose managerial 
problems.
Teachers also tend to think of  curriculum as something prescribed by an external au-
thority such as principals, textbook authors, educational authorities, and government. 
While it is true that much of  educational policy is determined outside the classroom, 
it is also true that teachers exercise tremendous actual control over what is taught and 
how it is taught in the classroom. In fact, research is very clear on the role of  teachers, 
placing it over the role of  policy and even curriculum. This is because the bulk of  
what is taught and – perhaps even more importantly – how it is taught depend on the 
skills, planning, experience, and preparedness of  the individual teacher. 
One important but often neglected consideration in curriculum planning is curric-
ulum for multigrade teaching. Curriculum developers and textbooks writers plan 
instruction material that is grade specific. The reality is otherwise. There are small 
schools in remote areas where multigrade teaching is usually conducted by teachers, 
or even by a teacher, with the responsibility of  teaching across grades according to a 
specific timetable. These teachers require the knowledge and skills to reorganize the 
prescribed curriculum to teach in such settings.
While it is true that teachers will always remain bound, to varying degrees, to external 
curricular policies and dictates, it is also true that within the classroom, teachers need 
to be able to negotiate prescribed curricula and teach content that is meaningful in 
ways that are effective. 
Essential questions 
• How 	does	the	curriculum	connect	with	classroom	management?
• What 	classroom	management	skills	do	I	need	to	implement	the	curriculum
successfully?
• How 	do	I	offer	differentiated	learning?
• How 	can	I	plan	lessons	in	a	way	that	motivates	and	engages	learners?
• What 	organizational	skills	do	I	need	to	manage	a	multigrade	classroom?4 R. Allington, ‘The Six T s of Effective 
Elementary Literacy Instruction’ (2002) 
http://www.readingrockets.org/arti -
cle/96/, accessed on 11 February 2013.

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
32
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
Suggested readings
I. Birch and M. Lally , Multigrade Teaching in Primary Schools (Bangkok: UNESCO 
Principal Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, 1995). 
Changing Teacher Practices: Using Curriculum Differentiation to Respond to Students’ 
Diversity (Paris: UNESCO, 2004). 
 Ø Available at http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0013/001365/136583e.pdf
Practical Tips for Teaching Large Classes: A Teacher’s Guide (Bangkok: UNESCO, 2006). 
 Ø Available at http://unesco.org.pk/education/icfe/resources/res15.pdf
‘Differentiated Instruction’, Reading Rockets 
 Ø http://www .readingrockets.org/atoz/differentiated_instruction/, 
 accessed on 28 February 2013
The Multi-grade Classroom: A Resource for Small Rural Schools – Book 4: Instructional 
Organization, Curriculum and Evaluation, (Portland, OR: Northwest Regional 
Educational Laboratory , 1999) 
Suggested activities and ideas for  
sessions on multigrade teaching
Teachers should be able to see how multigrade teaching requires a thorough curric-
ulum reorganization to make learning effective and meaningful for all classes. One 
basic condition must be established first: multigrade teaching is not deficit teaching. 
Multigrade teaching should be treated as a natural learning environment. Remember 
that students live with children of  different age groups (i.e. family), play sports with 
children of  other groups, and engage in other experiences with children of  different 
ages. Why should they be made to learn in an age-specific classroom? 
Class members can hold a small debate on the following questions:
•	 Why	do	we	have	class-specific	textbooks?	
•	 Why	do	we	give	a	class-specific	curriculum	when	we	claim	that	‘we	teach	a	
child, not the curriculum’? 

COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Management
33
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
These debates will problematize a given reality , and the Instructor can play a signif-
icant role in changing prospective teachers’ negative concepts of  multigrade class-
rooms from a deficit model of  teaching to teaching based on pedagogical principles.
There are five pedagogical principles that support multigrade teaching, which are 
given below .
1. Use the curriculum to plan. 
National curricula are typically produced for classrooms with a single class level. 
Each set of  class-specific material is typically placed in a separate booklet, which 
may include content to be taught as well as guidelines on how to teach it. Such 
curricula are difficult for multigrade teachers to use because they tend to require 
plans to be written separately for each level. This is not only time-consuming, but 
it may also result in ineffective instruction. Teachers need to know how to plan 
objectives for multiple class levels and how to amend the curriculum to make it 
more suitable for their setting. Similar observations may also apply to the school 
timetable. 
2. Students tend to develop independent work habits and self-study skills.  
3. Co-operation between different age groups is more common and results in 
collective ethics, concern, and responsibility . 
4. Students develop positive attitudes about helping each other.  
5. Remediation and enrichment activities can be more discreetly arranged than in 
classes with a single class level. 
 

 UNIT     3 
ROUTINES, SCHEDULES,  
AND TIME MANAGEMENT  
IN DIVERSE CLASSROOMS

COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Management
35
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
There is nothing as terrifying to the immature human being as a completely unstructured 
situation. Without a recognizable structure, they feel the teacher has abandoned them—and so 
he has—to their own impulses, all of which are my no means always constructive. –B. Morris 
The most creative environments are not the ever-changing ones. The artist’s studio, the re-
searcher’s laboratory, the scholar’s library are each kept deliberately simple so as to support the 
complexities of the work in progress. They are deliberately kept predictable so the unpredictable 
can happen. –Lucy Calkins
Unit introduction 
Administration of small tasks can actually be a big part of classroom management. 
Teachers need to have practical systems for gaining everyone’s attention, taking at -
tendance, collecting assignments, gathering students at a specific location, grouping 
and regrouping students, passing around supplies or handouts, dispersing or exiting 
class,	test	taking…the	list	of	tiny	administrative	actions	is	endless.	These	everyday	
classroom actions, if not administered efficiently, can become time-consuming, even 
downright chaotic.
Similarly, teachers need to have predictable systems for instruction. There needs 
to be an established protocol for listening silently while the teacher is explaining, 
raising a hand to ask a question, waiting one’s turn to be heard, participating in a 
whole-group discussion, transitioning from one subject or task to another, working 
in partnerships, working silently and independently, and working in small groups.
Structure allows teachers to manage student learning and productivity within 
limited time. However, for structures to be effective, they have to be predictable to 
students. In this unit, you will encourage Student Teachers to plan ideas for rou -
tines, structures, and time management and to gather tips and advice from veteran 
teachers (in print and in their surroundings) on the structures and routines that have 
proved most effective.
Essential questions
•	 How	can	I	reduce	the	number	of 	things	I	need	to	think	about	and	organize	
while I teach?
•	 What	are	the	benefits	of 	routines	for	teachers	and	students?
•	 Which	classroom	routines	should	I	use	and	when	should	I	use	them?
•	 What	kind	of 	routines	should	I	put	in	place	in	the	classroom?	How	do	I	put	
them in place?

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
36
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
Ideas for teaching
Class discussion
Discuss the difference between routines, procedures, and rules. Share examples. 
A rule may be ‘Show respect to others’. A procedure could be taking turns while 
talking. Teachers usually take responsibility for creating routines because they are 
responsible for organizing the work in the classroom. Teachers may also seek ideas 
for routines from children, and they may involve children in managing routines – 
for example, older children will take responsibility for helping younger children or 
groups of children might take turns to tidy the classroom at the end of the day.
Ask students to describe routines they have seen in class or can recall from their own 
experience at school. Examples might include:
•	 class-management	routines	(e.g.	checking	attendance,	routines	for	student	
movement, cleaning the blackboards, record keeping)
•	 lesson-management	routines	(e.g.	collecting	homework,	distributing	materi -
als, working in learning centres)
•	 interaction	procedures	(e.g.	raising	hands	to	answer	a	question,	taking	turns,	
asking to leave the classroom).
Explain that routines need to be taught, demonstrated, practised frequently with 
feedback, and re-taught, especially with younger children and during the first two 
weeks of a school year, until they become set habits.
Ask class members to work in small groups and discuss the benefits of routines for 
teachers and for children. Allow around five minutes for discussion and then have 
them report back to the whole class. Ideas might include:
•	 Routines	help	the	teacher	because	if 	children	can	do	something	without	
instructions from the teacher, the teacher has one less to do.
•	 Children	like	routines.	They	are	familiar	and	they	can	create	a	sense	of 	
responsibility .
Observation and interviews
Arrange for Student Teachers to visit a classroom to observe routines. Note that in 
very teacher-centred classrooms there will be fewer routines, so choose the class -
rooms carefully. Student Teachers could also interview teachers and children about 
routines in their classroom or at school. 
Resources
Teach for America, ‘Maximizing the Efficiency and Structure of Your Classroom’, in 
Classroom Management and Culture  (published in 2011) 
 Ø http:/ /teachingasleadership.org/sites/default/files/Related-Readings/CMC_ 
Ch3_2011.pdf, accessed on 11 February 2013.
 Ø

UNIT4
CREATING SHARED VALUES 
AND COMMUNITY

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
38
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3 UNIT 2
To have as our educational goal, the production of caring, competent, loving and  
lovable people is not anti-intellectual. Rather, it demonstrates respect for the full range  
of human talents. –Nel Noddings
Unit introduction 
You may have a wonderful curriculum and well-ordered routines and structures, but 
if you do not know the names and backgrounds of your students or if your students 
are not building and sharing their learning with each other, an extremely valuable 
resource is being wasted in your classroom. Students can learn from each other as 
much as they can learn from you – perhaps more. Creating a community of learners 
means building a feeling of mutual trust, respect, collaboration, and support be -
tween the group of learners that make up your class. It means teaching children how 
to take care of themselves, their fellow students, their environment, and their work.
Effective teachers develop a sense of community in the classroom. This means that 
students share a feeling of fellowship with each other that results from common 
attitudes, experiences, and values. These values should foster respect for each other 
and each other’s property, opinions, beliefs, and cultures. 
The teacher’s role in setting and monitoring these values is invaluable. First and 
foremost, a teacher models the values and behaviours that are expected from stu -
dents. Second, the teacher uses the curriculum to teach values and behaviours (some 
subject areas allow for such lessons more than others). Third, the teacher devotes 
specific time and focus to the teaching of these behaviours and invites students to 
participate actively in upholding them.
 
Essential questions
•	 What	role	do	values	and	a	sense	of 	community	play	in	classroom	management?
•	 What	is	‘ethic	of 	care’	in	education	as	defined	by	Nel	Noddings?	In	my	
personal history as a learner, how have I experienced this ethic?
•	 What	are	some	practical	tips	for	instilling	a	sense	of 	community	in	a	diverse	
group of  learners?
•	 What	are	some	values	I	would	want	my	future	students	to	uphold	and	how	
would I promote or teach these? 
Ideas for teaching
Student T eacher interactions
Prepare Student Teachers to observe a teacher in class, and ask them to address the 
following questions:
•	 How	many	times	does	the	teacher	address	individual	students	in	class?
•	 How	many	times	does	the	teacher	address	individual	students	by	their	names?
•	 How	does	the	teacher	start	the	class	(e.g.	with	a	greeting,	asking	students	
how they are, beginning immediately with content)? 

COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Management 
39
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
•	 What	does	the	teacher’s	body	language	convey	to	you?	(Notice	eye	contact,	
hand gestures, posture etc.) 
•	 How	would	you	describe	the	teacher’s	tone	of 	voice?	
After the visit, ask Student Teachers to share reflections in small groups and write a 
reflective piece to record their thoughts.
Reinforcing good behaviour
Lead a discussion on how a classroom teacher can offer rewards to reinforce good 
behaviour among children. Emphasize how offering rewards for positive behaviour 
will create classroom discipline and strengthen the bond between teacher and 
students. The opportunity to earn collective rewards will make students use peer 
pressure to get each other to behave better.  
Explain that rewards are not objects. Instead, they could be an extra 10 minutes at 
break time, a role as a class leader, time to do something in class that children like, or 
praise in front of other children and teachers. 
Ask Student Teachers to give examples of the types of collective behaviour that 
might earn rewards. Examples might include:
•	 returning	to	class	promptly	after	break	time
•	 leaving	shoes	outside	the	class	in	a	tidy	manner
•	 switching	off 	lights	and	fans	before	leaving	class
•	 cleaning	up.
The ethics of caring
As a pair-share activity, have Student Teachers work in pairs as they recollect 
childhood memories of their positive and painful experience in school. They should 
discuss how these experiences affected their overall experience at school.
Use one of the course readings about the ethics of caring as a basis for a lecture. 
Suggested readings
R. S. Charney, Teaching Children to Care—Classroom Management for Ethical and 
Academic Growth, K–8  (Greenfield, MA: Northeast Foundation for Children, 2002).
N. Noddings, ‘Caring in Education’, in The Encyclopaedia of Informal Education   
(published in 2005)
 Ø www.infed.org/biblio/noddings_caring_in_education.htm, accessed on 11 
February 2013.  
N. Noddings, ‘Teaching Themes of Care’, Character, 14 (2007), 1–5. Available at
 Ø  http:/ /www.bu.edu/ccsr/files/2011/04/Spring-2007.pdf
‘Module 1: Creating a Community of Learners’, Getting Results – A Professional 
Development Course for Community College Educators  (published in 2006)
 Ø http://www.league.org/gettingresults/web/p/module1.pdf,  
 accessed on 28 February 2013.

 UNIT     5 
COURSE REVIEW 

COURSE GUIDE: Classroom Management 
41
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3UNIT 2
Unit 5: Course review
Use the final week in the course to help Student Teachers to review and critique their 
projects and assignments, and the content of the course.

Faculty Resources

FACULTY RESOURCES : Classroom Management
43
Student Handout: W eek 1, session 2 
How do humans learn?
Since the time of Aristotle and Plato, philosophers have tried to answer this question. 
In the process, they’ve created various theories of learning. Today, it isn’t just philos -
ophers who are interested in how humans learn; psychologists, computer engineers, 
medical doctors, and educators are all interested in theories of learning.
But to answer this question – how do humans learn? – is not easy. This is because 
human learning itself is varied and complex. There is no one theory that is accepted 
for all kinds or instances of learning. Instead, thinkers through the centuries have 
forwarded many different theories about human learning. Each theory has its merits 
and limitations. 
Learning theories can be divided into the following broad, simplified categories:
Behaviourism:  Behaviourists believe that behaviours are learnt as a response to 
stimuli in the environment. (Behaviourism is also called the stimulus-response 
theory). Behaviourists believe that humans (as well as animals) will repeat acts that 
lead to favourable outcomes and stop acts that lead to unfavourable outcomes. A be-
haviour that is rewarded is repeated and eventually becomes a learnt habit. Similarly, 
a behaviour that is punished is unlearnt. Behaviourists measure human learning by 
studying behaviours that are measurable and observable – unlike thinking, which is 
internal, invisible, and therefore, difficult to observe or measure. 
Cognitivism: Cognitivists challenge behaviourist theory. They assert that human 
learning cannot always be measured through behaviours – learning is invisible; 
it occurs in the mind and does not always translate into observable action. They 
emphasize the role of memory and prior knowledge in the comprehension or con -
struction of new knowledge (e.g. using analogy or example to teach new concepts). 
Cognitivists are interested in mental structures – in how humans store, integrate, 
and retrieve information. One attempt to explain this is the ‘schema theory’, where a 
schema is an organized pattern of thought. 
Constructivism:  This theory suggests that humans build their own unique knowl -
edge and understanding of the world. When a child experiences and interacts with 
an environment, then this allows the child to build an understanding about the 
elements of this environment.
 
S
References
L. Hammond, K. Austin, S. Orcutt, and J. Rosso, How People Learn: Introduction to 
Learning Theories  (published in 2001) 
 Ø http:/ /www.stanford.edu/class/ed269/hplintrochapter.pdf ,  
 accessed 11 February 2013. 

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
44
Learning theories through the ages
Philosopher and era Theory
Socrates (469–399 BC) Developed the dialectic method of discovering truth 
through reasoning and through conversations with 
fellow citizens (learning via discourse)
Plato (427–347 BC) Believed that truth and knowledge are to be found with -
in us and can be discovered by self-reflection (reflection 
as a tool for developing thinking)
Aristotle (384–322 BC) Believed that truth and knowledge are to be found out -
side of us and can be discovered and explored through 
the senses (learning via inquiry)
Romans (9th century 
BC–5th century AD)
Emphasized education as training for jobs and em -
ployment, rather than as training of the mind for the 
discovery of truth (They needed a citizenry that could 
contribute to society in a practical way, for building 
roads and aqueducts.) (learning by guided doing – voca -
tional education and apprenticeship) 
Roman Catholic 
Church (500–1500 AD)
Transmitted knowledge from the priest to the people; 
emphasized rote memorization and recitation of scrip -
ture and learning trades through apprenticeships
Renaissance Humanists 
(15th–17th centuries)
Returned to the Greek concept of education as an 
exploration of the arts and humanities (Renaissance 
philosophers fought for freedom of thought, and thus 
humanism, a study of human values that are not reli -
gion-based, was born.)
Descartes (1596–1650) Believed that ideas can exist prior to experience and that 
the mind is separate from the body
Locke (1632–1704) Believed that a child’s mind is like a blank slate that is 
shaped by experiences; believed that we use our senses 
to gain experience and hence create knowledge
Rousseau (1712–1778) Suggested that education should be shaped to the child; 
celebrated the concept of childhood and felt that chil -
dren should be allowed to develop naturally
Kant (1724–1804) Referred to knowledge that was present before experi -
ence, or ‘a priori’ knowledge (Awareness of knowledge 
may begin with experience but knowledge existed prior 
to experience. )
Thorndike (1874–1949) Favoured active learning and believed that environment 
can be structured to ensure certain stimuli that would 
produce learning; believed that learning was based on an 
association between sense impressions and an impulse 
to action
Skinner (1904–1990) Considered learning to be the production of desired 
behaviours and denied any influence of mental processes

FACULTY RESOURCES : Classroom Management
45
Philosopher and era Theory
Piaget (1896–1980) •	 The	first	to	state	that	students	create	knowledge	
rather than receive knowledge from the teacher
•	 Recognized	that	students	construct	knowledge	based	
on their experiences and that how they do so is 
related to their biological, physical, and mental stage 
of  development
•	 Mapped	stages	of 	development	in	children
Vygotsky (1896–1934) •	 Extended	Piaget’s	developmental	theory	of 	cognitive	
abilities of  the individual to include the notion of  
social-cultural cognition – that is, the idea that all 
learning occurs in a cultural context and involves 
social interactions
•	 Emphasized	the	role	that	culture	and	language	play	
in developing students’ thinking and the ways in 
which teachers and peers assist learners in develop-
ing new ideas and skills 
•	 Proposed	the	concept	of 	the	zone	of 	proximal	
development (ZPD), which suggested that students 
learn subjects best just beyond their range of  existing 
experience; the teacher or a peer assist students in 
bridging the distance between what they know or 
can do independently and what they can know or do 
with assistance (Schunk, 1996)
•	 Led	to	an	emphasis	on	the	deliberate	use	of 	dis-
course and co-operative learning in the classroom 
and theories of  assistance, or scaffolding, that help 
students learn in systematic ways
Dewey (1859–1952) Established the first laboratory school; was one of the 
first to suggest that learning was a situated activity
Montessori (1870–1952) •	 Introduced	a	liberated	concept	of 	early	childhood	
education that provided more opportunity for free 
expression, moving children away from their desks, 
providing them with activities, and respecting 
children as individuals
•	 Believed	(like	Dewey)	that	students	learn	through	
carefully chosen activities
•	 Believed	that	the	task	of 	the	teacher	involves	pre-
paring a series of  cultural activities spread over a 
specially prepared environment and then refraining 
from obtrusive interference
Bruner (1915–Present) •	 Developed	the	idea	that	if 	complex	material	is	
broken down into its essential ideas, any student can 
learn any subject matter – ‘ Any subject can be taught 
effectively in some intellectually honest form to any 
child at any stage of  development’ (Bruner, 1977). 
•	 Developed	the	concept	of 	spiral	curriculum	in	which	
students return to the same subject matter as they 
grow older, but each time, or at each spiral, the 
material is more complex

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
46
Faculty Resource: Unit 2 
Organizing the curriculum in the  
multigrade classroom
Introduction
The organization of teaching curricula for multigrade teaching is a crucial param -
eter for providing adequate qualitative education. Usually, teachers are supposed 
to implement the graded curriculum designed for single-grade education. There is 
no provision for the case of multigrade classrooms, and professional support does 
not exist. In addition, when teachers apply multigrade teaching strategies, such 
as different forms of grouping or self-directed learning, they must modify graded 
curriculum practice in order to meet their students’ needs. This document aims to 
provide general guidelines on how to modify curricula and how to organize teach -
ing in multigrade classes in order to become a more effective multigrade teacher.
Theoretical background 
Multigrade classrooms represent flexible classroom formations. This flexibility is the 
key to effective classroom and curriculum organization. There is no golden rule on 
how to transform graded curriculum into something that is applicable in the multi -
grade classroom. This process of curriculum transformation and adaptation to the 
structure of the multigrade class depends on several factors. Grouping methods, the 
nature of students groups, and school conditions and resources influence, to a signif -
icant degree, the manner in which curricula are transformed. You should feel free to 
be flexible when reorganizing the curriculum to encompass your class’s teaching and 
learning conditions. Moreover, ask for other teachers’ opinions and advice or consult 
with parents and, in cases of special needs students, specialists.
In many countries, teachers are not guided on adapting curriculum and ultimately 
apply a single class curriculum in a multigrade class. This causes a series of problems 
because a single class curriculum:
•	 is	not	designed	for	multigrade	settings
•	 places	a	heavier	work	load	on	multigrade	teachers
•	 impedes	the	capacity	of 	multigrade	teachers,	especially	if 	facilities	are	lacking	
and management problems exist at the local level
•	 does	not	take	into	account	the	time	constraints	that	govern	multigrade	
teaching.
The reorganization of curriculum should be focused on overcoming these problems. 
The first step is to try to identify the minimum learning competencies that that 
children in each class must achieve. Below is the sequence of steps for reorganizing 
curriculum:
F

FACULTY RESOURCES : Classroom Management
47
Steps to be followed 
•	 Look	for	topic	objectives	in	the	curriculum	for	the	given	subject	and	classes.	
•	 Select	a	theme	to	organize	these	objectives.	
•	 Decide	on	activity	for	whole	class	to	start.	
•	 Break	into	class-specific	groups	to	meet	class-specific	objectives.
 
Suggested activities for Student T eachers
In small groups, read the material and respond to the following questions:
 
•	 What	basic	argument	does	this	article	present	on	curriculum	design?
•	 In	your	opinion	how	can	a	teacher	reorganize	a	single	class	curriculum	for	a	
multigrade classroom?
•	 Has	anyone	in	your	group	experienced	multigrade	teaching?	If 	so,	share	the	
challenges and strengths.
Putting theory into practice (reorganizing the curriculum)
•	 Select	one	subject	covered	in	a	primary	classroom.
•	 From	the	textbooks	for	classes	1–5	look	for	topics	that	are	common	in	these	
classes (e.g. science, social studies, and maths). 
•	 Write	down	at	least	two	or	three	objectives	for	the	common	topic	selected	for	
each class level. 
•	 Develop	class-specific	activities	to	help	students	achieve	class-specific	
objectives, 
•	 Support	students	while	they	are	working	in	their	specific	areas.	
•	 Share	your	plan	with	another	group	and	receive	feedback.	

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
48
Faculty Resource: Unit 2 
Peer tutoring
Peer tutoring is co-operation between two or more students. In peer tutoring, one 
individual imparts knowledge to the other(s). This can occur between students of 
the same age or class level (same-age tutoring) or between students of different ages 
or class levels (cross-age tutoring). For example, when one student helps another 
student to learn maths, we can say peer tutoring has taken place. This may be a class 
6 student helping a class 1 student or two class 1 students tutoring each other.
In the traditional single-level classroom, peer tutoring may occur on an incidental 
basis, as when one student seeks help with a maths problem from a neighbour. In 
the multigrade classroom, this incidental tutoring is an encouraged and necessary 
instructional activity. Research evidence specifically focusing on incidental tutoring 
in multigrade classrooms is non-existent. However, research on structured tutoring 
programmes is abundant and overwhelmingly positive. 
In structured peer tutoring, teachers set up mixed ability groups of students and 
assign peer-tutoring roles to specific students in these groups. Instructions can help 
in designing structured peer tutoring. Try following these when planning a multi -
grade lesson:
1. Select the lesson that you consider easy to implement peer tutoring
2. Make the necessary rearrangements in your schedule so that you can proceed 
with the activity in the selected subject.
3. Set up mixed age groups of  students for the subject you want to teach.  
It is preferable for you to select the groups before the lesson in order  
to save time and focus on the implementation of  peer tutoring. 
4. Select the peer tutors for each group and design activities. 
Also, try to follow the tips given below.
Good planning 
Successfully introducing peer tutoring in class requires detailed planning, careful 
monitoring, and continuous support for the young tutors. Research indicates that 
good and detailed planning benefits students while enhancing tutors’ self-esteem and 
creating a good creative climate in the class.
Careful selection of tutors
One of the most sensitive parameters for successful peer tutoring is selecting the 
best tutors among the group. Age and academic performance are two of the criteria 
used for selecting students. Engage older and good students as tutors and capitalize 
on their cognitive and intellectual maturity. Other important parameters for tutor 
selection are sociability and personality. 
F

FACULTY RESOURCES : Classroom Management
49
Detailed design of tutoring activities
Design activities that will allow peer tutors to actually support their tutees. Based on 
your personal judgement, choose different tutors for different subjects or activities. 
Select tutors that you think could manage the tutoring group activity best. Give 
them detailed instructions on how to perform the activities and how to handle their 
tutees. Prepare material if necessary that will help the children to manage with the 
activity. Try to utilise the resources that your multigrade class has to design multidi -
mensional activities that will benefit both young tutors and their tutees. 
Ongoing supervision and support for tutors
It is very crucial not to leave the young peer tutors completely on their own to deal 
with their teammates. You should share your teaching time among the groups 
according to the lesson needs and try to guide the tutors on their work. Give them 
advice on how to manage tutees and try to prevent any misbehaviour by supervising 
the young tutors.
Utilize school resources 
Try to involve students in open activities utilising school resources such as books, 
laboratory equipment, and spaces like playgrounds. Design activities that require 
different levels of involvement from the students. Also, such activities will allow the 
student tutors to learn by engaging themselves in the activities’ more complex tasks. 
Keep record of the students’ activities
Try to record the activities of each student group and the overall progress of the teams. 
In addition, try to record any distinctive characteristics of effective or ineffective tutor-
ing behaviour. This will help you better understand the ways that children co-operate 
and will provide insight on how to support better peer tutoring in you class. 
Preparing and debriefing peer tutors 
Initiate a discussion with young tutors before and after the lesson. Before the activi -
ties you should encourage them in their leadership roles and stress the importance of 
their work for their teammates. Give them advice on the appropriate way to handle 
their tutees and try to offer examples on how to instruct others. After the lesson, 
discuss the experience with your tutors and try to record any positive or negative 
aspects of the procedure. Encourage your tutors by thanking them for their work 
and try inspiring them to continue tutoring in future. 
Preparing and debriefing tutees
You should talk with young tutees before and after the lesson as well, to calm any 
possible fears they might have about working with other children. Explain to them 
that they will get assistance from friends and ask their opinion on the lesson after -
wards. Record their input and take it into account when planning future activities.
Engage parents of tutors and tutees
In order to make peer tutoring successful, parents must be informed about peer 
tutoring plans. There may be activities outside traditional school hours in which peer 
tutoring would require parental consent.

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
50
Faculty Resource: Unit 2 
The activity centres approach
Theoretical background
The multigrade classroom has to be well organized and structured in a way to 
facilitate different types of teaching and learning. Managing a multigrade classroom, 
which is usually non-homogeneous with respect to age, ability, and other param-
eters, is complicated. One way to overcome several problems is to organize the 
classroom using an activity centres approach. 
An activity center can be defined as any discernible pattern of student or teacher 
behavior that can be clearly described and labeled. One common example is seatwork, 
where students work independently at a desk. Another example is pairwork, where 
two students work together. Three or more students working together is generally 
characterized as groupwork. A classroom may also have areas designated for art, 
audio-visual equipment, computers, and other instructional resources. Each example 
reflects a type of activity where expectations for behavior may be clearly defined. 
An activity center is best described as an area of the classroom that the teacher has 
designated for a specific purpose. –Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory 5  
The above definition of the activity-centres approach, as presented in the Northwest 
Regional Educational Laboratory book, focuses on ‘designated patterns with specific 
expectations of students’ behaviour’. This definition of the activity centres approach 
is differentiated slightly and includes similar concepts as ‘learning centres’ or ‘subject 
area resource centres’.
A learning centre  is a self-instruction learning activity that has been placed in a 
clearly defined area of the classroom. It can be used in any subject and generally 
includes objectives, instructions, and evaluation. A subject area resource centre  is 
an area where student resources related to a specific subject are located. For example, 
specific resources related to science may all be located in a well-marked area of the 
classroom that forms a specific centre. 
It is essential for multigrade teachers to understand what kind of organization 
reform needs to be done in the classroom in order to have a more effective classroom 
setting. To get a better idea about the necessary reform, teachers should answer the 
following questions:
• What 	types	of 	 activities 	 normally 	 occur 	 in 	 my 	 classroom?
• What 	types	of 	 activities 	 would 	 I 	 like 	 to 	 occur?
• How 	can	I	facilitate	group	activities?
• Are 	there	students	who	can	tutor?
• Do 	I	meet	separately	with	individual	students	or	small	groups?
5  The Multigrade Classroom: A Resource 
Handbook for Small Rural Schools – Book 
2: Classroom Organization   (Portland, 
OR: Northwest Regional Educational 
Laboratory). Available at: http://educa-
tionnorthwest.org/webfm_send/1151/
F

FACULTY RESOURCES : Classroom Management
51
In general, one can easily specify some types of activities found in most multigrade 
classrooms such as:
•	 quiet	or	individual	work	
•	 whole-class	teaching
•	 pair	work
•	 group	work.
Although such conditions are seen in single level classes as well, in a multigrade 
setting they demand a lot of planning on the part of the teacher as these activities 
will differ for each class level in the classroom. 

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
52
Faculty Resource: Unit 2 
Who is a multigrade teacher and how 
do research and literature help define 
the roles and functions of a multigrade 
teacher?
It is obvious that a combined class of students differs from a conventional class with 
a single grade. Students in a multigrade class must be taught differently, and the 
function of the teacher in the multigrade classroom is multidimensional and more 
complicated and demanding. As teachers do not receive proper guidance on how to 
teach in a multigrade context, they may deem such classes a result of poor admin -
istrative and develop a negative attitude towards multigrade teaching. To change 
such views, it is important to help teachers re-evaluate their position on multigrade 
teaching so that they see it as a potential to teach students differently. 
Educational authorities and teacher training institutions should make efforts to 
reverse this negative view of multigrade teaching (in rural schools) and provide 
teachers with the resources and support to overcome any difficulties.
The categorization of the different roles presented here is based on similar former 
research activities, training attempts, and documentation found in the literature and 
are more or less well accepted by the wider educational community. These common 
functions which multigrade teachers must carry out in their schools are as follows:
As a facilitator
Teaching is currently synonym with facilitation. A multigrade teacher understands 
differences between pupils having different age, abilities and grade specific knowl -
edge. The multigrade teacher’s role is to be able to motivate students to learn and to 
guide them through their learning materials as a facilitator on a group level and on a 
one-to-one basis.
As a planner
Planning is a critical function for the multigrade teacher. Planning in the multigrade 
school classroom is much more important that in a class with one level. Teaching must 
be productive for all student groups in the class, and therefore, the teacher much be 
mindful of how time is spent to ensure that all subjects at all levels are covered. 
F

FACULTY RESOURCES : Classroom Management
53
A teacher has to plan for each class level, not for just one subject. Moreover, for each 
level, the teacher must determine the answers to the following questions:
•	 Whom	do	I	teach?
•	 What	must	I	teach?
•	 How	do	I	teach?
•	 When	do	I	teach?
•	 Why	do	I	teach	this?
Once you have determined the answers to these questions, devise an implementation 
plan in order to achieve the objectives of the lesson for each class.
As a materials designer
Although the textbook curriculum is usually prepared by national educational 
authorities, multigrade teachers still need to develop their own additional materials. 
These additional materials meet the actual and concrete needs of multigrade teach -
ing. Examples of such curriculum materials include the following:
•	 designing	and	making	small	boards,	flash	cards,	and	other	learning	tools	to	
save time in the classroom and to maximize the time pupils spend on learning 
tasks
•	 using	local	materials	to	develop	instructional	materials	and	to	encourage	
students to make their own
•	 designing	workbooks	suitable	for	student	use	within	the	local	context	and	
conditions
•	 including	activities	and	knowledge	that	are	relevant	to	the	local	culture	within	
these materials and workbooks.
As a contact with the community
Multigrade teachers are the critical link between the school and its community. 
Where multigrade schools exist, co-operation with and assistance from the local 
community are often essential to improve the quality of educational services provid -
ed by the school. This may include community involvement in activities as diverse 
as building and maintaining classrooms, preparing curriculum teaching aids, and 
acting as paraprofessional teachers.

