Educational 
Psychology
WINDOWS ON PRACTICE GUIDE
B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary
2012
5semester
This product has been made possible by the support of  the American People through the United States Agency for 
International Development (USAID). The contents of  this report are the sole responsibility of  the authors, and do 
not necessarily reflect the views of  USAID or the United States Government.
Technical Support: Education Development Center (EDC); Teachers College, Columbia University
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
ii
Foreword
Teacher education in Pakistan is leaping into the future. This updated Scheme of  Studies is the latest 
milestone in a journey that began in earnest in 2006 with the development of  a National Curriculum, 
which was later augmented by the 2008 National Professional Standards for Teachers in Pakistan and 
the 2010 Curriculum of  Education Scheme of  Studies. With these foundations in place, the Higher 
Education Commission (HEC) and the USAID Teacher Education Project engaged faculty across the 
nation to develop detailed syllabi and course guides for the four-year B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary and the 
two-year Associate Degree in Education (ADE).
The syllabi and course guides have been reviewed by the National Curriculum Review Committee 
(NCRC ) and the syllabi are approved as the updated Scheme of  Studies for the ADE and B.Ed. (Hons) 
Elementary programmes.
As an educator, I am especially inspired by the creativity and engagement of  this updated Scheme of  
Studies. It offers the potential for a seismic change in how we educate our teachers and ultimately our 
country’s youngsters. Colleges and universities that use programmes like these provide their students 
with the universally valuable tools of  critical thinking, hands-on learning, and collaborative study .
I am grateful to all who have contributed to this exciting process; in particular the faculty and staff  
from universities, colleges, and provincial institutions who gave freely of  their time and expertise for 
the purpose of  preparing teachers with the knowledge, skills, and dispositions required for nurturing 
students in elementary grades. Their contributions to improving the quality of  basic education in 
Pakistan are incalculable. I would also like to thank the distinguished NCRC members, who helped 
further enrich the curricula by their recommendations. The generous support received from the 
United States Agency for International Development (USAID) enabled HEC to draw on technical 
assistance and subject-matter expertise of  the scholars at Education Development Center, Inc., and 
Teachers College, Columbia University . Together, this partnership has produced a vitally important 
resource for Pakistan.
PR
OF . DR. SOHAIL NAQVI
Executive Director
Higher Education Commission
Islamabad
HOW THIS COURSE GUIDE W AS DEVELOPED
iii
How the Windows on Practice  
guide was developed
As part of  nationwide reforms to improve the quality of  teacher education, the 
Higher Education Commission (HEC), with technical assistance from the USAID 
Teacher Education Project, engaged faculty across the nation to develop detailed 
syllabi for courses for the new four-year B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary programme. 
The process of  designing the syllabus for each course in years 3–4 of  the 
programme began with curriculum design workshops. Deans and directors 
from universities where these courses will be taught were invited to attend the 
workshops. The first workshop included national and international subject matter 
experts who led participants in a seminar focused on a review and update of  
subject (content) knowledge. The remainder of  this workshop was spent reviewing 
the HEC Scheme of  Studies, organizing course content across the semester, 
developing detailed unit descriptions, and preparing the course syllabi. Although 
the course syllabi are designed primarily for Student Teachers taking the course, 
they are useful resources for teacher educators too. 
Following the initial workshop, faculty participants developed teaching notes 
that included ideas for teaching units of  studies and related resources. Working 
individually or in groups, participants focused on their own teaching methods 
and strategies and how they could be useful to the course’s future teachers. 
Subsequent workshops were held over the course of  a year to give faculty sufficient 
time to complete their work, engage in peer review , and receive critical feedback 
from national and international consultants. In designing both the syllabi and the 
teaching notes, faculty and subject matter experts were guided by the National 
Professional Standards for Teachers in Pakistan (2009). 
All of  the syllabi developed by faculty who participated in the workshops are 
included in this document, along with a list of  topical teaching notes. Additional 
references and resources appear at the end of  the document. These should provide 
a rich resource for faculty who will teach this course in the future. Sample syllabi 
with accompanying teaching notes are also included to provide new Instructors 
with a model for developing curriculum and planning to teach. This Windows on 
Practice guide is not intended to provide a complete curriculum with a standard 
syllabus and fully developed units of  study , rather it aims to suggest ideas and 
resources for Instructors to use in their own planning. Hence, readers will find 
sample units and materials that reflect the perspective of  faculty designers rather 
than prescriptions for practice.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
iv
We are respectful of  intellectual property rights and have not included any 
suggested materials that are copyright protected or for which we have not secured 
explicit permission to use. Therefore, all materials included may be used in 
classrooms for educational purposes. Materials in this document are not intended 
for commercial use, however. They may not be used in other publications without 
securing permission for their use.
Initial drafts were reviewed by the National Curriculum Review Committee 
(NCRC) and suggestions were incorporated into final drafts, which were then 
submitted to the NCRC for approval. 
Faculty involved in course design: Abdul Rasool, Shah Abdul Latif  University Sindh 
(SALU), Khairpur; Ameer Bano, Allama Iqbal Open University (AIOU), Islamabad; 
Dr Amjad Reba, University of  Peshawar, Peshawar; Fouzia Ghais, Fatima Jinnah 
Women University , Rawalpindi; Ismatullah Cheema, University of  Education, 
Lahore; Dr Javed Iqbal, Karakoram International University (KIU), Gilgit; 
Shahzada Qaiser, University of  Education, Lahore; Liaquat, SALU, Khairpur; 
Liaquat Hussain, Gomal University , DI Khan; Maroof  Bin Rauf, University of  
Karachi, Karachi; Sadaf  Naz, Hazara University , Hazara; Sadia Suleman, Sardar 
Bahadur Khan Women’s University (SBKWU), Quetta; Shahzada Qaiser, University 
of  Education, Lahore; Tahira Bibi Naushahi, AIOU, Islamabad; Tarique Bhatti, 
University of  Sindh, Hyderabad; Dr Tehseen Aslam, Institute of  Educational 
Research (IER), University of  the Punjab, Lahore
Subject and content specialist leading the seminar: Dr Margaret Jo Shepherd, 
Professor Emeritus, Teachers College, Columbia University , New York City , USA
Date of  NCRC review process: 11–12 January 2013 
NCRC reviewers: Dr Mumtaz Akhtar, University of  the Punjab, Lahore; M. Asif  
Malik, Hazara University , Hazara; Fauzia Khurshid, National University of  Modern 
Languages, Islamabad; Nabi Bux Jummani, International Islamic University , 
Islamabad

T able of contents
1 Rationale for a course on 08
 educational psychology
  Common misconceptions about  09
 educational psychology
2  Course syllabi 11 
  Syllabus 1: Liaquat Hussain, Sadia Suleman,  12    
  and Dr Javed Iqbal  
  Syllabus 2: T arique Bhatti and Maroof Bin Rauf  19
   Syllabus 3: Abdul Rasool and Liaquat Ali  26
  Syllabus 4: Ismatullah Cheema, Shazada Qaiser,  30 
  T ahira Bibi  Naushahi, Ameer Bano, and Dr T ehseen Aslam
3  Representative syllabus with teaching notes  36
  Option 1: Dr Amjad Reba and Fouzia Ghais   37
  Option 2: Sadaf Naz  54
 4 
4  Integrated teaching notes 68 
  Introduction to educational psychology  69
  Sample session 1  69
  Sample session 2  71
  Sample session 3  73
  Learning process 74
  Sample session 1  74
  Sample session 2  75
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rationale for a 
course on educational 
psychology
T able of contents (cont.)
  Suggested assignments  76
  Assignment 1   76
  Assignment 2   76
  Assignment 3   77
  Assignment 4   77
5  Educational psychology material  78 
 and resources
  Sample assessment rubrics  80
6  Methods and strategies to use in planning  81
7  Articles and readings  86
  Reading 1: ‘Individual Differences’  87
  Reading 2: ‘Individual Differences and  92
  Differential Psychology: A Brief History and Prospect’
B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY 08
1
Rationale for a 
course on educational 
psychology
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
09
Rationale for a course  
on educational psychology
In the HEC 2010 document, ‘Curriculum of Education: B.Ed (Hons.) 4-year Degree 
Programme’, educational psychology was added as a foundation course. The main 
focus of the educational psychology course is to help Student Teachers develop 
their understanding of human behaviour and mental processes within an education 
context. The content of the course will help Student Teachers understand 
psychological concepts, encourage them to examine their own learning, and show 
them how to apply these concepts as teachers. The course focuses on acquainting 
Student Teachers with concepts such as learning, memory, intelligence, and 
motivation, in order to align their teaching with the psychological needs of students. 
Student Teachers will review a variety of techniques designed to help students grow 
as efficient learners.
Common misconceptions about  
educational psychology
There are many common misconceptions about educational psychology. Some 
examples include the following: 
• People only use 10% of their brains. 
• Memory works like a filing cabinet, with facts, audio and video recordings,  
 and other data filed away for later access. 
• Some people are ‘left brained’ and others are ‘right brained’.  
• Our brain takes in data and processes it logically. 
• Learning is a difficult process. 
• Learning takes place in a classroom. 
• A quiet classroom is the best environment for learning. 
• When the teacher or students are done talking about a topic,  
  it has been taught. 
• Traditional schooling prepares students for life in the real world. 
• Intelligence tests are culturally biased. 
Teachers of educational psychology should be wary of these misconceptions. They 
need to identify and examine their own misconceptions and help Student Teachers 
do the same. Student Teachers can reflect on, discuss, and test their misconceptions 
in an attempt to confront them. For example, the common misconceptions listed 
above can be overcome with the following explanations:
• As far as we know, all parts of our brains are used, although scientists are  
 currently unable to explain all aspects of brain function.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
10
• Memory is particularly complex, and the durability of a memory is  
 dependent on how it processes information, how it is rehearsed, and how  
  similar it is to other information. When recalling information, the brain  
 pieces together data and may even fill in the blanks with a person’s own  
 assumptions or prejudices.
• There are some lateralized attributes (i.e. that are focused on one side of  
 the brain), but almost everyone uses both sides of their brain equally.  
 Furthermore, there is no dichotomy between ‘logical’ and ‘creative’ people.  
 Some people are adept at logical and creative thinking, some are adept at one  
 but not the other, and some are adept at neither.
• The brain is very active – it plays a role in how a person perceives things  
 and what information is absorbed or ignored. An individual’s expectations  
 and prejudices also determine what information is taken in.
• Learning can be difficult, but humans have an impulse to learn. Learning  
 becomes more difficult for some people when they are expected to learn in  
 certain ways.
• Classrooms can be great places for learning, but learning takes place  
 throughout life, everywhere.
• While quiet environments may be helpful at times, most learning takes  
 place in very active circumstances. A quiet classroom is not necessarily  
 always a good educational environment.
• A concept might not have been thoroughly taught until a teacher has fully  
 explained it and students have deeply explored it. Some teachers may even  
 create the conditions for learning without ever saying anything!
• Some students respond to traditional schooling and leave feeling prepared  
  for daily living. Others are unable to make relevant connections between  
 school and life and, thus, leave school unprepared.
• Although a great deal of work has been done on intelligence testing to  
 overcome cultural bias, there are those who still make a strong argument  
 that intelligence tests are heavily weighted in favour of Western culture.
Further details of misconceptions about educational psychology can be found on the 
following website: 
 Ø http:/ /www.thedailyriff.com/articles/howard-gardner-shares-his-just-
released-97.php
Contributed by Liaquat Hussain, Sadia Suleman, and Dr Javed Iqbal
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
11
2
Course syllabi 
EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
12
EDUCATIONAL PSYCHOLOGY
This section contains syllabi that have been written by individual faculty or groups of  
faculty . Using the HEC Scheme of  Studies for the course, they considered the balance 
between the demands of  the subject itself, active learning pedagogies, their students, 
and the particular university milieu in which they work. The syllabi all reflect the 
same key concepts and broad goals, but they vary in sequence and emphasis. 
SYLLABUS 1
Prepared by 
Liaquat Hussain, Sadia Suleman, and Dr Javed Iqbal 
Year, semester
Year 3, Semester 5
Credit hours
3 credits (48 contact hours)
 
Prerequisite
Successful completion of Child Development course
Course description
This course is an introduction to educational psychology that covers the basic concepts, 
theories, and principles of  human development, learning, motivation, individual 
differences, intelligence, and assessment. Additionally , it relates how these concepts 
are applied to classroom teaching. In an educational setting, it is essential for teachers 
to know about human development and how students learn. Students learn according 
to their own pace and ability , so concepts about individual differences and different 
types of  learners are also covered. 
Learning outcomes
At the end of  this course, Student Teachers will be able to: 
• describe different schools of thought and differentiate between psychology 
 and educational psychology
• define learning and explain different theories of learning and their 
  application in the classroom
• categorize individual differences based on physical, intellectual,  
 emotional, and socio-cultural differences.
• analyse the concept and theories of motivation
• analyse the impact of educational psychology on the processes of teaching  
 and learning.
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
13
Essential questions
• Why do we behave the way we do? 
• How can knowing and understanding research help shape effective  
 teaching practice? 
• Can educational psychology inform teaching? 
• What is good teaching and how is it recognized?
Main ideas
• Knowledge is actively and socially constructed by each person in light of and  
 in relation to past experiences, the context of learning, personal motivation, 
 and personal beliefs, attitudes, and prior knowledge.
• We have learned how the human mind functions, yet we do not yet know  
 how people learn.
• Cognitive psychologists’ understanding of the learning process of  
 school-aged children is constantly evolving.
• It is the learners who learn.
• Metacognition, simply put, is learning about learning. More specifically, it is  
 about knowing who we are as learners and developing the capacity to leverage 
 our strengths to our advantage. 
• Educational psychology applies the psychological principles that underlie  
 learning in both formal and informal educational settings.
Learning and teaching approaches
A major portion of  the course will be taught using an interactive, student-centred 
teaching approach through the following methods: 
• inquiry content and process 
• discussion 
• cooperative learning strategies (e.g. jigsaw, readings, group work, mind 
 mapping, and think, pair, share) 
• question and answer
• text-against-text 
• interactive lectures.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
14
Unit 1: Basics of educational psychology 
This course focuses on teaching and the theories educational psychology offers about 
how we learn. Unit 1 examines different theories and how each can be applied to 
classroom practice. This unit is designed to help Student Teachers identify which 
theory is appropriate for their needs and which theory to apply when evaluating 
instructional programmes. 
Learning outcomes
At the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will be able to:
l differentiate between psychology and educational psychology
l explain different schools of thought, such as behaviourism, cognitivism,  
 and humanism, and the implication of each for on teaching and learning
l explain the advantages and disadvantages of each approach
l consider and successfully integrate aspects of different approaches in their 
 teaching practice. 
Unit 2: Learning process
Unit 2 explores complex questions about how students learn, how human beings 
use their senses to interact with the environment, how information is processed, and 
how individuals would cope in different life situations if  their basis of  learning were 
removed. Student Teachers will also examine how people have tried to answer these 
questions using different theories of  motivation. This unit is not confined to classroom 
learning; it will consider how learned material is applied to real-life situations. 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will be able to:
l demonstrate their understanding of different learning theories
l compare different learning theories and identify their own theories of learning
l critique and justify which theories are best suited for students’ individual   
 differences.  
Unit 3: Individual differences
Unit 3 focuses on individual differences among students. Teachers interact with a 
large number of  students who are not only physically different, but have mental, 
social, cultural, and emotional differences. Therefore, teachers must be aware of  the 
differences in their students in order to teach effectively . 
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
15
Learning outcomes
At the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will be able to: 
l recognize individual differences in approaches to learning
l identify teaching methods that impact individual learning
l analyse varied student abilities and plan their teaching accordingly
l assess their own confidence to teach students with special needs. 
Unit 4: Motivation
Unit 4 examines human motivation. Psychologists who study motivation note that an 
infant is driven by biological needs. However, other motivations appear as the child 
interacts with other people and the environment. These psychological motives are 
classified by different theorists, including Maslow , a psychologist studied in this course 
who developed a needs theory to explain the interactions between people and their 
physical, social, and emotional environment. 
Learning outcomes 
At the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will be able to: 
l identify how learning and motivation are shaped by social contexts in  
 homes, school, and communities
l analyse the implications of Maslow’s theory of motivation on Student  
 Teachers’ teaching
l identify success seekers and failure avoiders in their own classrooms.  
Weekly distribution of course content
UNIT 1: Basics of  educational psychology
Weeks 1–4 Content
1
The nature of  educational psychology
The scope of  educational psychology
The differences between psychology and educational psychology 
2
Conceptual approaches to psychology
Structuralism and functionalism 
Cognitivism 
3
Behaviourist theory
Humanistic theory
Constructivist theory
4
Gestalt psychology
Psychoanalysis
Why do we study educational psychology?
1
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
16
UNIT 2: Learning process
Weeks 5–9 Content
5 The definition of  learning
How do we learn?
6 Learning theories
Behaviourist theory and a critique of  its use in the classroom
7 Cognitive theory and a critique of  its use in the classroom
Social learning theory and a critique of  its use in the classroom
8 Constructivist theory and a critique of  its use in the classroom
Brain-based learning and a critique of  its use in the classroom
9 Transfer of  learning
Factors affecting learning
2
UNIT 3: Individual differences
Weeks 10–13 Content
10 The concept of  individual differences
How do people differ?
11
Why do people differ?
An overview of  physical, emotional, social, and mental differences
How to deal with individual differences
12 Children with special needs
Physical disabilities
13
Learning disabilities
Emotional disturbance
Social and economic disadvantages
Gifted learners
3
UNIT 4: Motivation
Weeks 14–15 Content
14 Needs and drives
Basic and acquired motives
15 How is a child motivated?
Techniques of  motivation
16
Classification of  human motives: Maslow’s need theory
Psychoanalytic theory
Kohn’s motivational theory
4
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
17
Assessment techniques
A variety of  assessment techniques will be used. Internal evaluation will account for 
40% of  marks and include assignments (10%), presentations (10%), and tests (20%).
External evaluation (essays and objective tests) will account for 60% of  marks and 
include an objective portion (20%) and an essay portion (40%).
Grading policy
University grading policy , the details of  which will be provided in class, will be 
followed. 
T extbooks and references
The course will draw on textbooks, journal articles, and websites. A list of  these will 
be distributed in class. 
Resources
The following resources may be helpful for choosing appropriate readings. You may 
include your chosen list of  readings on the syllabus or distribute it in class. However, 
readings should include only those resources that you expect students to use 
throughout the course. Other readings should be distributed as they are needed. 
Identify specific chapters from recommended books.
Printed materials 
Elliott, S. N., Kratockwill, T . R., Cook, J. L., & Travers J. F . (2000). Educational 
Psychology: Effective Teaching, Effective Learning (3rd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
 Ø Available at http://www.mhhe.com/socscience/education/elliott/book/ 
today.htm
Felder, R. M., & Brent, R. (2005). Understanding Student Differences.  Journal of  
Engineering Education, 9, 57–72. 
 Ø Available at http:/ /eprints.me.psu.ac.th/ILS/info/Understanding_Differences.pdf
The following link connects to a resource on the importance of  individual differences 
among children. It offers both practical examples of  how teachers can help students 
by creating effective learning environments and related activities. This resource was 
developed for B.Ed. students by Asia e University . 
 Ø http:/ /peoplelearn.homestead.com/BEduc/Chapter_7.pdf
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
18
Websites 
This website gives foundational information on learning theories and provides 
examples of  how school teachers can integrate each theory of  learning into a lesson 
plan. It is a useful resource for both Student Teachers and Instructors. 
 Ø http://web.utk.edu/~rmcneele/classroom/theories.html
This chapter centres on three concepts: Bloom’s Taxonomy , multiple intelligences and 
learning modalities, and memory theory . It provides a solid foundation that can help 
Student Teachers hone their lesson planning and instructional skills.
 Ø http:/ /teachingasleadership.org/sites/default/files/Related-Readings/LT_
Ch1_2011.pdf
Dr C. George Boeree gives a short biography on Abraham Maslow and outlines his 
theory of  personality development. The article critically discusses the limitations 
and strengths of  the theory in simple language. This is a suitable reading for Student 
Teachers.
 Ø http:/ /webspace.ship.edu/cgboer/maslow.html
This website offers lecture notes on 14 topics, including cognitive theories, 
individual differences, assessments, standardized testing, motivation, and classroom 
management. It is a rich resource for teachers. 
 Ø http://www2.raritanval.edu/departments/HumanitiesSocSci/Part-Time/Wolfe/
edpsych/notes.html
Select the ‘Educational Psychology’ link on the left-hand menu of  this site to find 
topical lecture notes on 16 topics as well as study guides. The notes offer teachers a 
brief  summary of  theories and concepts in educational psychology . The materials are 
all in Word, so they are easy to access. 
 Ø http://www.karencrawfordphd.com/default.asp
 
The International Academy of  Education website features this booklet by Monique 
Boekaerts, the 10th in the Educational Practice series on improving learning. It 
provides information on motivation and learning, and explains principles that 
encourage children to learn.
 Ø http:/ /www.ibe.unesco.org/fileadmin/user_upload/archive/publications/
EducationalPracticesSeriesPdf/prac10e.pdf
Notes on resources for lectures
This page has a helpful discussion on teaching psychology , including how to vary 
teaching techniques. 
 Ø http://www.ehow.com/how_4422139_teach-psychology-class.html
On this website, Marcia L. Conner offers a concise description of  the major theories 
covered in this syllabus. 
 Ø http://www.coitweb.uncc.edu/~dcassidy/A%20Primer%20on%20
Educational%20Psychology.htm
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
19
SYLLABUS 2
Prepared by 
T arique Bhatti and Maroof Bin Rauf
Year, semester  
Year 3, semester 5
Credit value 
3 credits (48 contact hours)
Prerequisite
Successful completion of Child Development course
Course description
This course is designed to provide Student Teachers with up-to-date information on 
educational psychology and its application in the teaching and learning processes. This 
course will provide an opportunity for Student Teachers to develop an understanding 
of  different concepts and principles of  educational psychological and to analyse their 
application through readings, discussions, and small projects. 
Student Teachers will develop a working knowledge of  theories of  educational 
psychology based on varying viewpoints and developmental influences and that 
provide guidance on practical application and teaching methods. They will study ways 
to approach the learning process, intelligence, motivation, and learning difficulties of  
students in an educational context.
Learning outcomes
At the end of  this course, Student Teachers will be able to: 
• demonstrate their understanding of the concept of educational psychology  
 a nd its implication for educational practices
• apply learning principles to their teaching to help students maximize their  
 le arning
• compare various theories of learning and human learning capabilities
• analyse the role of motivation theories and principles in their instructional  
 a ctivities
• understand various concepts of intelligence and apply this understanding 
 i n monitoring class performance of their students.
Main idea
During curriculum planning and design, the role of  the learner and the learning 
process must be considered. 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
20
Unit 1: Understanding educational 
psychology 
In this unit, Student Teachers will explore various schools of  thought throughout the 
history of  educational psychology as well as educational psychology’s nature, scope, 
and impact on classroom practices.
Essential questions 
• What do we study in educational psychology?
• Why is it important for a Student Teacher to study educational psychology?
• How do theories and knowledge of educational psychology apply to daily  
 c lassroom practices?  
Skills to be practised by Student T eachers
• Reading 
• Analysing
• Describing
• Classifying
• Categorizing
• Synthesizing
• Decision-making
• Critical thinking  
Activities in which Student T eachers will be engaged
• Discussions
• Role plays 
• Case study analyses  
Modes of assessment
• Quizzes 
• Group work to define educational psychology 
• Written tasks 
Unit 2: Intelligence and individual  
differences 
In this unit, Student Teachers will explore the concept of  intelligence in an educational 
context. This unit will include an analysis of  the theory of  multiple intelligences and 
identify approaches to address the specific needs of  learners. Because multiple intelligences 
theory has been challenged by research, critiques of  the theory will be considered. 
Individual differences will be discussed with regard to diversity in our surroundings. 
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
21
Essential questions 
• Why do we study intelligences and individual differences?
• To help them develop intelligence, how can we address the needs of  
 in dividual learners?
Skills to be practised by Student T eachers
• Reflecting 
• Analysing
• Engaging in interactive discussions 
Activities in which Student T eachers will be engaged 
• Discussions
• Role plays 
• Presentations (e.g. PowerPoint, video clips) on individual differences
• Case studies 
• Socratic questioning  
Modes of assessment
• Assignments 
• Weekly reflection
• Group presentations 
• Minor research tasks
Unit 3: Learning
This unit will help Student Teachers explore different learning theories and analyse 
their application in the teaching and learning processes.
Essential questions
• Why is the concept of learning essential for teachers?
• How can teachers enhance student learning in different areas?
• How does knowledge of learning theories help teachers enhance the process  
 of  teaching?
Skills to be practised by Student T eachers 
• Analysing
• Describing
• Critical thinking
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
22
Modes of assessment 
• Presentation on different learning theories 
• Unit reviews
• Test s 
• Midterm exams
Unit 4: Motivation 
The unit will help Student Teachers investigate the relationship between motivation 
and student learning. Student Teachers will analyse different theories of  motivation 
and explore the effect of  motivation on their teaching.
Essential questions
• Why is motivation so important?
• What are the different types of motivation that facilitate effective learning?
Skills to be practised by Student T eachers
• Describing 
• Analysing
Activities in which Student T eachers will be engaged
• Interactive lectures
• Case studies
• Role plays
• Socratic questioning 
• Presentations (e.g. PowerPoint)
Modes of assessment
• Written assignments 
• Midterm exams
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
23
Unit 5: Learning difficulties and disabilities
This unit will explore the difference between learning difficulties and disabilities and 
how this knowledge can help teachers facilitate learning.
Essential questions 
• Why is it essential for teachers to study learning disabilities and learning  
 d ifficulties?
• How does an understanding of learning difficulties help teachers to  
 f acilitate learning? 
Skills to be practised by Student T eachers 
• Describing 
• Interpreting
• Explaining 
• Resolving case studies
Activities in which Student T eachers will be engaged
• Interactive lectures
• Focused readings
• Interactive discussions
• Case studies
• Role plays
• Small-group discussions
Modes of assessment
• Written assignments 
• Group presentations
Weekly distribution of course content
UNIT 1: Understanding educational psychology
Weeks Content
1–4
Definitions, meaning, objectives, and scope of educational psychology
Educational psychology methods and techniques 
Recent developments in educational psychology 
1
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
24
UNIT 2: Intelligence and individual differences
Weeks Content
5–7
Defining intelligence
The meaning of intelligence 
Intelligence as a process
Approaches to intelligence
Multiple intelligences
Diversity, individual differences, and working memory
2
UNIT 3: Learning
Weeks Content
8–11
Historical perspectives on learning 
Six schools of  educational psychology 
• Psychoanalytic
• Behavioural
• Cognitive (and information processing)
• Humanistic
• Social constructivist
• Cognitive constructivist
Application of  theory to education
3
UNIT 4: Motivation
Weeks Content
12–13
Motivation
Types of  motivation 
• Maslow’s theory of  motivation  
• Weiner’s attribution theory 
Implication for educators 
Other strategies of  how to help motivate learners
4
UNIT 5: Learning difficulties and disabilities
Weeks Content
14–16
Learning difficulties and disabilities
Signs and symptoms of  learning disabilities and disorders
Helping children with learning difficulties 
5
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
25
Major assignments 
At the end of  this course, Student Teachers will be required to submit their weekly 
reflections in a journal that documents their responses to the course content. 
Reflections will be evaluated on the basis of  what Student Teachers have learned and 
how their learning can be used effectively in the classroom. The journal will account 
for 10% of  the final grade.
Grading policy
University grading policy , the details of  which will be provided in class, will be 
followed. 
T extbooks and references 
The course will draw on textbooks, journal articles, and websites. A list of  these will 
be distributed in class. 
Resources
The following resources may be helpful for choosing appropriate readings. You may 
include your chosen list of  readings on the syllabus or distribute it in class. However, 
readings should include only those resources that you expect Student Teachers to 
use throughout the course. Other readings should be distributed as they are needed. 
Identify specific chapters from recommended books.
Coon, D., & Mitterer, J. O. (2007). Introduction to Psychology: Gateways to Mind and 
Behavior . Melbourne: Wadsworth.
Dash, N., & Dash, B. N. (2004). A Textbook of  Educational Psychology (4th ed.). New 
Delhi: Shipra Publications.
Mangal, S. K. (2007). Advanced Educational Psychology (2nd ed.). New Delhi: Prentice 
Hall of  India.
Plotnik, R. (2005). Introduction to Psychology (7th ed.). Melbourne: Wadsworth.
Santrock, J. W . (2004). Life Span Development (9th ed.). Boston: McGraw-Hill.
Woolfolk, A. E. (2010). Educational Psychology (11th ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
26
SYLLABUS 3
Prepared by 
Abdul Rasool and Liaquat 
Year, semester  
Year 3, semester 5
Credit value 
3 credits (48 contact hours)
Prerequisites
Successful completion of semesters 1–4
Course description
This course is designed to help Student Teachers understand the essential components 
of  human behaviour and their application in the teaching and learning processes. The 
course will provide Student Teachers with an opportunity to explore various theories 
about cognitive, social, and moral development. It will also cover how different 
schools of  thought approach psychology , in particular educational psychology , 
intelligence, and memory in relation to education. The implication of  different 
teaching and learning processes on education and the importance of  using interactive 
and learner-centred approaches will be emphasized.
Course outcomes
At the end of  this course, Student Teachers will be able to: 
• apply learning theories to classroom teaching
• analyse the process of teaching and learning based on educational  
 psychology principles
• use various principles and theories of motivation in classroom teaching
• demonstrate their understanding of various methods that promote effective  
 and long-term learning. 
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
27
Learning and teaching approaches
A variety of  teaching and learning approaches will be used throughout this course, 
including:
• lectures and demonstrations (traditional and interactive)
• self-reflection and self-analysis
• group discussions
• group activities
• case studies
• role plays.
Semester outline
Unit 1: Introduction to educational psychology (3 weeks) 
Unit 1 provides an overview of  the dominant educational psychology principles and 
concepts and how they apply in an educational context. Student Teachers will explore 
goals of  educational psychology , its implications in an educational context, its scope, 
and its importance in the teaching and learning processes. 
Unit 2: Learning (5 weeks) 
Unit 2 will provide an overview of  laws and theories of  learning and learning 
difficulties in the context of  principles of  educational psychology . Emphasis will be 
placed on the nature of  diverse learners in different contexts, and techniques and 
strategies to cope with challenging situations in the classroom will be offered. 
Unit 3: Motivation (3 weeks) 
Unit 3 will focus on the principles and theories of  motivation related to the behavioural, 
cognitive, and social perspectives of  educational psychology . This unit will equip 
Student Teachers with a better understanding of  the processes involved in teaching 
and learning and the interactions between teacher and student.
Unit 4: Memory (1 week)
Unit 4 explores the concept of  memory and aims to help Student Teachers develop 
an understanding of  the role of  memory and forgetting in the learning process. This 
unit will also enable Student Teachers to adapt some techniques to promote long-
term memory practices. Application of  such practices in the field of  education will be 
emphasized. 
Unit 5: Intelligence (1 week)
Unit 5 will provide an overview of  the concept of  intelligence, its types and theories, 
and its application in an educational context.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
28
Weekly distribution of course content
UNIT 1:  Introduction to educational psychology
Weeks 1–3 Content
1 Definition of  psychology
The importance of  educational psychology
2 Goals of  psychology
3
Schools of  psychology (biological, cognitive, behavioural, psychoanalytic, 
humanistic) 
The implications of  educational psychology
1
UNIT 2:  Learning
Weeks 4–8 Content
4 Definition of  learning 
5 Theories of  learning (classical and operant conditioning)
6–7 Theories of  learning (social, constructivist, and cognitive) 
8 Learning difficulties (dyslexia and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder)
The learning process
2
UNIT 3:  Motivation
Weeks 9–11 Content
Definition of  motivation
Types (intrinsic and extrinsic) 
Five general approaches to motivation 
Self-perception
Theory of  motivation (Maslow’s hierarchy) 
3
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
29
UNIT 4:  Memory
Weeks 12–14 Content
Definition of  memory
Types of  memory 
The processes of  memory and forgetting
Application in an educational context
4
UNIT 5:  Intelligence; Exam
Weeks 15–16 Content
15
Concept of  intelligence
Theories of  intelligence 
• Howard Gardner’s multiple intelligences theory
• Sternberg’s triarchic theory
• John Fisher’s personal construct psychology 
• Charles Spearman’s general intelligence theory 
16 Final exam
5
Grading policy
University grading policy , the details of  which will be provided in class, will be 
followed. 
T extbooks and references 
The course will draw on textbooks, journal articles, and websites. A list of  these will 
be distributed in class. 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
30
SYLLABUS 4
Prepared by  
Ismatullah Cheema, Shazada Qaiser, Ameer Bano, T ahira Bibi,  
and Dr T ehseen Aslam
Year, semester 
Year 3, semester 5
Credit value 
3 credits (48 contact hours)
Prerequisite
Successful completion of Child Development course
Course description
The enrolment rate in primary education in Pakistan is low , and the dropout rate is 
very high. One explanation for the high dropout rate is that teachers have difficulty 
understanding and responding to the learning problems of  children from diverse 
backgrounds and their behaviours at various stages of  development. The course is 
designed to help Student Teachers conceptualize and apply psychological principles 
that underlie learning in their classroom practice in order to improve the learning 
outcomes of  all children. It will emphasize improving practices that promote the  
emotional well-being of  students, based on a theoretical understanding of  psychological 
concepts. Student Teachers will also have an opportunity to consolidate their 
understanding of  the content covered in their Child Development course. The 
principles and concepts introduced in educational psychology will help Student 
Teachers professionally handle problems relating to the teaching-learning process. 
Course outcomes
After completing this course, Student Teachers will be able to: 
• explain key concepts used in educational psychology
• use students’ abilities to promote their cognitive development effectively
• identify and use students’ self-concept and self-esteem to help them  
 perform effectively both in and out of school
• identify and apply strategies that promote good relationships between  
 teachers and students
• interpret and critique the role of Gardner’s theory of multiple intelligences  
 in the teaching-learning process
• prepare an action plan for using motivational techniques. 
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
31
T eaching and learning approaches
A variety of  teaching and learning strategies will be used to promote active learning, 
including mini-lectures, small-group discussions, case study analysis, problem-solving 
exercises, simulated planning exercises, and presentations.
Unit 1: Understanding educational 
psychology
Unit 1 explores the difference between psychology and educational psychology and the 
latter’s significance in classroom practices. Educational psychology can be understood 
as the study of  learners, learning, and teaching, all subsumed under the heading 
‘educational psychology’. This definition can be expanded to include the knowledge, 
wisdom, and everyday theory that all teachers require in their classroom practices.
Learning outcomes
At the end of  the unit, Student Teachers will be able to:
 l explain key concepts in educational psychology
 l trace the roots of educational psychology
 l identify teaching styles that promote active learning and incorporate  
  them into their teaching-learning process
 l explain the role of educational psychology in making the teaching-  
 learning process effective.
Weekly distribution of course content
UNIT 1:  Understanding educational psychology
Week Content
1
Educational psychology
What is psychology?
What is education?
What is educational psychology?
Historical perspectives on educational psychology 
2
T eaching and learning processes
What is teaching?
Qualities of  a good teacher
The role of  the teacher
• Teachers’ role as facilitator in promoting healthy teacher–student  
 interactions
• Teaching perspective and instructional decision-making
• Decision-making within the system
3
The importance of educational psychology
Teaching and learning processes
Applying psychological principles in teaching and learning
1
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
32
Unit 2: Learning
Unit 2 will explore different theories of  learning that attempt to explain the learning 
process of  children, with a key focus on constructivist theory of  learning. Student 
Teachers are assumed to have completed the Child Development course, and it is 
assumed they will understand how students learn at different stages of  their mental 
and physical development. This unit also explains how teachers can apply these 
theories to promote learning in their classrooms.
Learning outcomes
At the end of  the unit, Student Teachers will be able to: 
 l define learning broadly
 l demonstrate understanding of different theoretical perspectives of  
 student learning
 l apply learning theories to bring about conceptual change in students.
Weekly distribution of course content
UNIT 2:  Learning
Week Content
4
Learning: An orientation
Definition of  learning
Learning processes
Type of  learning
5–6
Gestalt views of learning
Concept of  Gestalt learning
Organizational principle
Socio-cognition perspective
Cognitive learning view
Bandera’s perspective
7–9
Constructive learning view
Discovery learning
Expository learning
Cooperative learning
Conditions of  learning
Educational implications of  the constructive learning view
2
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
33
Unit 3: Individual differences  
and intelligence 
Unit 3 will investigate how to incorporate Gardner’s theory of  multiple intelligences 
into teaching. Student Teachers will compare and contrast the ways in which students 
from various cultures and ethnic groups are alike and different and then identify the 
implications of  these differences for classroom practice. Student Teachers will similarly 
compare and contrast male and female students and identify what can be done to 
provide equitable educational opportunities for both genders. 
Learning outcomes
At the end of  the unit, Student Teachers will be able to:
 l discuss the concept of intelligence
 l compare and contrast individual differences among students and reasons  
 for these differences
 l identify and apply theories of intelligence during classroom teaching
 l explore methods of creativity and utilize them in the process of teaching  
 and learning
 l explain learning styles of students based on theories learned in the unit.
Weekly distribution of course content
UNIT 3:  Individual differences and intelligence
Week Content
10
Individual differences
Definition of  individual differences
Areas of  individual differences
Educational provisions for meeting individual variation
11–12
Intelligence
Definition of  intelligence
Theories of  intelligence
Use in education
Creativity
Learning styles
Types of  learning styles
Educational implications of  learning styles
3
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
34
Unit 4: Motivation
Unit 4 explores how teachers and parents provide motivation, help children become 
aware of  their own needs, and inspire them in such a way that children willingly and 
eagerly involve themselves in certain activities to meet those needs. Student Teachers 
will learn to describe the functional sources of  motivation, explain its role in the 
learning process, compare and contrast intrinsic and extrinsic motivation, and explain 
how the basic human needs for self-worth and relatedness influence motivation. 
Additionally this unit describes the role played by emotion in learning. 
Learning outcomes
At the end of  the unit, Student Teachers will be able to:
 l identify the importance and functions of motivation in student learning 
 b ehaviours
 l compare and analyse the role of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation in  
 s tudent learning
 l apply major theories of motivation in a classroom context
 l implement effective techniques and strategies of motivation during  
 c lassroom teaching.
Weekly distribution of course content
UNIT 4:  Motivation
Week Content
14
Introduction to motivation
The importance and function of  motivation
Intrinsic motivation and extrinsic motivation
15–16
Theories of motivation
Content theories of  motivation
Process theories of  motivation
Reinforcement theories of  motivation
4
Grading policy
University grading policy , the details of  which will be provided in class, will be followed. 
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
35
T extbooks and references 
The course will draw on textbooks, journal articles, and websites. A list of  these will 
be distributed in class. 
Resources
The following resources may be helpful to you in choosing appropriate readings. 
You may include your chosen list of  readings on the syllabus or distribute it in class. 
However, readings should include only those resources that you expect students to 
use throughout the course. Other readings should be distributed as needed. Identify 
specific chapters from recommended books.
Unit 1
O’Donnell, A., Levee, J., & Smith, J. (2012). Educational Psychology: Reflection for Action 
(3rd ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley .
Rubie-Davies, C. M. (ed.) (2011). Educational Psychology: Concepts, Research, and 
Challenges. New York: Routledge.
Unit 2
Beard, C., & Wilson, J. P . (2006). Experiential Learning: A Best Practice Handbook for 
Educators and Trainers (2nd ed.). London: Kogan Page.
Schunk, D. H. (2011). Learning Theories: An Educational Perspective (5th ed.). New Delhi: 
Dorling Kindersley .
Illeris, K. (ed.) (2009). Contemporary Theories of  Learning: Learning Theories…in Their 
W ords. New York: Routledge.
Unit 3
Chamorro-Premuzic, T . (2011). Personality and Individual Differences. London: Wiley .
Maltby , J., Macaskill, A., & Day , L. (2010). Personality, Individual Differences and 
Intelligence (2nd ed.). Sheffield: Prentice-Hall.
Haslam, N. (2007). Introduction to Personality and Intelligence. London: SAGE.
Unit 4
Gilbert, I. (2013). Essential Motivation in the Classroom (2nd ed.) Abingdon, UK: 
Routledge.
Wiseman, D. G., & Hunt, G. H. (2008). Best Practice in Motivation and Management in 
the Classroom. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas. 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
36
Representative 
syllabi with 
teaching notes
3
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
37
This section contains two syllabi, each with accompanying teaching notes. The 
Integrated Teaching Notes section offers additional notes that have been integrated 
using broad themes addressed in the course. Faculty who are teaching the course 
for the first time or who are interested the process of curriculum design may find 
it useful to see how the authors of these representative syllabi chose to develop 
particular ideas and themes in their notes. (Ideas presented here differ from those in 
the Integrated Teaching Notes, where integrated themes may be found.)
REPRESENTATIVE SYLLABUS 1 
Year, semester
Year 3, semester 5
Credit value
3 credits (48 contact hours)
Prerequisite
Successful completion of semesters 1–4
Course description
Educational Psychology is a compulsory course in the B.Ed. (Hons) programme. It 
is designed to provide an in-depth understanding of the central ideas of educational 
psychology. 
As an interdisciplinary blend of psychology and education, educational psychology 
addresses both theoretical and practical issues. It investigates the science of human 
behaviour, especially behaviour connected to teaching and learning. Student 
Teachers will consider how theoretical and empirical knowledge about different 
aspects of educational psychology can be applied to educational settings. In 
particular, the focus will be on the practice of the core principles of learning, their 
uses in understanding the learning and behaviour of students, and the application of 
these principles to classroom practices. 
Additionally, Student Teachers will learn about the perspectives of different educational 
psychologists with regard to the cognitive, social, and moral development of 
individuals. Student Teachers will study the concept and theories of intelligence, 
the theory of multiple intelligences, personality, and motivation. This course also 
includes different psychological testing tools and attitude measurement scales along 
with guidance and counselling in educational settings.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
38
Course outcomes
After completing this course, Student Teachers will be able to:
 l analyse the nature of educational psychology and its importance in the  
 context of education
 l discuss theoretical perspectives that can be used to explain learning and  
 different attributes of learners including intelligence, motivation,  
 and personality
 l explore the nature of memory and creativity
 l identify strategies to develop critical thinking among learners
 l identify components of metacognition and explore how teachers can  
 promote this behaviour in their students
 l recognize characteristics of psychological testing and assessment  
 techniques related to attitude, interest, and personality traits.
Learning and teaching approaches
Different interactive strategies will be applied to teach the course content. These 
strategies include discussions, debates, case studies, and questioning, all of which 
promote creativity, critical and analytical skills, and cooperation. Moreover, 
independent learning will be encouraged through in-class and homework 
assignments involving use of the library and technology. Supportive reading 
materials will be provided to Student Teachers at the start of the course so that they 
develop the habit of reading before class. This will enable them to raise the level 
of in-class discussion and make the course more dynamic. Various approaches and 
strategies will be employed to help Student Teachers reflect on how their learning 
can be applied in their own classrooms.
Unit 1: Introduction to 
educational psychology
Both artistry and knowledge of the principles of instruction are considered essential 
to becoming an effective teacher. Educational psychology offers many principles 
upon which teachers can draw. The core principles of educational psychology are 
drawn from both basic and applied research, with a specific focus on how people 
learn. Unit 1 sets the foundation of the course – Student Teachers will be introduced 
to the course’s sub-themes and apply them in a classroom setting by identifying 
psychological problems in both teaching and learning. 
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
39
Duration: 3 weeks (9 hours)
Learning outcomes
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to:
 l describe and explain different perspectives on educational psychology
 l explain the scope and importance of educational psychology
 l identify branches of educational psychology 
 l relate educational psychology with other disciplines.
UNIT 1:  Introduction of  educational psychology
Week Content
1
Introduction to the course: Learning expectations, course assessment, and grading 
The meaning and concepts of educational psychology 
Principles of educational psychology 
2 The scope of educational psychology in the classroom 
Applying educational psychology in the classroom 
3 Branches of educational psychology 
The relationship between educational psychology and other disciplines
1
T eaching methodologies
• Interactive lectures
• Brainstorming (individuals and groups)
• Think, pair, share activities
• Question and answer
• Discussions
• Role play
Unit 2: Learner development
Unit 2 will enhance Student Teachers’ cognitive development, to reason, to think, 
and to be moral and responsible citizens. It is commonly understood that each 
human act occurs in response to a problem, but there is great variation in the 
solutions people devise. Some solutions are better than the others, so students 
should be taught effective problem-solving skills. Related cognitive functions, 
particularly creativity and how creativity can be developed among all learners, 
will be discussed. Self-concept, morality, and motivation of learners will also be 
explored. Student Teachers will be introduced to the factors that cause students’ 
moral reasoning and behaviour to change over time and what teachers can do to 
promote moral development.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
40
Duration: 3 weeks (9 hours)
Learning outcomes
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to:
 l analyse the impact of home, family, school, and teacher on social  
 d evelopment of students
 l recognize the role of creativity and critical thinking in the development  
 o f a learner
 l discuss moral and ethical values and their effect on a learner’s development.
UNIT 2:  Learning development
Week Content
4 Home and family as a factor in social development
School and teacher as a factor in social development
5
Critical thinking
Creativity
Assessing creativity 
Creativity in the classroom
6 Lawrence Kohlberg’s theory of moral development
2
T eaching methodologies
• Interactive lectures
• Jigsaw technique
• Group discussions
• Handouts 
Unit 3: Learning theories and  
their application
Unit 3 explores various theoretical perspectives on student learning. Specific topics 
will include different theories of learning, how modelling can be used to facilitate 
learning, the role played by self-efficacy in learning, and how teachers can use 
modelling and students’ self-efficacy to enhance learning.
Duration: 3 weeks (9 hours)
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
41
Learning outcomes
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to:
 l understand various perspectives on learning 
 l identify different elements, principles, and approaches to learning
 l recognize the role of modelling and students’ self-efficacy in enhancing  
 l earning. 
UNIT 3:  Learning theories and their application
Week Content
7 Introduction to learning
Learning theories (Piaget, Skinner, and Gestalt)
8 Learning theories (Vygotsky and Bandura) 
Principles of learning
9 Different approaches to learning (social and humanistic)
3
T eaching methodologies
• Interactive lectures
• Brainstorming
• Cooperative learning techniques
• Group discussions
• Handouts
Unit 4: Attributes of a learner: Intelligence, 
motivation, and metacognition
Unit 4 investigates how to incorporate Gardner’s theory of multiple intelligences into 
classroom teaching. This unit will also help Student Teachers compare and contrast 
the ways in which students from various cultural and ethnic groups are apt to be 
alike and different from one another. They will identify the implications of these 
differences for classroom practices. Additionally, Student Teachers will identify the 
components of self-regulation, metacognition, and motivation and will investigate 
their impact on teaching and learning.
Duration: 3 weeks (9 hours)
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
42
Learning outcomes
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to:
 l understand the concept of intelligence and multiple intelligences
 l identify and define types of metacognition
 l discuss different techniques of motivation and their usefulness in classroom.
UNIT 4:  Attributes of  a learner: Intelligence, motivation, and metacognition
Week Content
10 The meaning and concept of intelligence
Multiple intelligences theory (Howard Gardner)
11
Metacognition
Typology of metacognitive components
Facilitating students’ metacognition
12
Introduction to motivation
Types of motivation 
Motivational techniques
Application of motivation principles in education
4
T eaching methodologies
• Interactive lectures
• Question and answer
• Group discussions
• Role play
Unit 5: Role of educational psychology in 
assessment and evaluation 
Unit 5 is designed to develop analytical and critical thinking skills among Student 
Teachers. This unit will facilitate their understanding of different types of assessment 
procedures in light of educational psychology. Student Teachers will develop skills to 
identify the need for assessment and to facilitate the learning process through the use 
of assessment. Additionally, this unit will explore assessment through engagement in 
authentic tasks pertinent to classroom assessment.
Duration: 3 weeks (9 hours)
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
43
Learning outcomes
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to:
 l explain various alternative, authentic, and performance-based  
 a ssessment techniques
 l develop different criteria-based tasks and assessment plans to evaluate  
 t heir students’ learning and to improve their own classroom practices
 l use rubrics to implement different authentic and performance assessments.
UNIT 5: Role of  educational psychology in assessment and evaluation
Week Content
13 Assessing instructional objectives
Classroom assessment (grading procedure, formative and summative evaluation)
14 Tests (norms-referenced and criteria-referenced)
Test construction and different types of tests
15 Alternative to traditional assessment (authentic and performance)
Introduction to rubrics for assessment and evaluation in education 
16 Revision
5
T eaching methodologies
• Whole-class discussions
• Pair work
• Individual work
• Cooperative learning
Assessments
A variety of assessment techniques will be used, including exams, assignments, and a 
portfolio. Each of the following assessments will account for the listed percentage of 
Student Teachers’ final marks:
• midterm (covers Units 1 and 2): 30%
• final exam (covers Units 3–5): 50%
• internal assessments: 20%
¡¡ assignments: 10%
¡¡ portfolio: 10%
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
44
Grading policy
University grading policy, the details of which will be provided in class, will be 
followed. 
T extbooks and references 
The course will draw on textbooks, journal articles, and websites. A list of these will 
be distributed in class. 
Resources
The following resources may be helpful to you in choosing appropriate readings. 
You may include your chosen list of readings on the syllabus or distribute it in class. 
However, readings should include only those resources that you expect students to 
use throughout the course. Other readings should be distributed as needed. Identify 
specific chapters from recommended books.
Eggen, P & Kauchak, D. (2004) Educational Psychology: Windows on Classroom. (4th ed.) 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Framingham, J. (2011). Types of Psychological Testing. Psych Central. Available from
 Ø http://psychcentral.com/lib/2011/types-of-psychological-testing/
Kerri-Lee, K. (2003). Educational Psychology for Learning and Teaching. Melbourne: 
Nelson Thomson.
Additional reading
Bhatia, K. (2004). Psychological Foundation of Education . New Delhi: Kalyani.
Black, P. & Wiliam D. (2009), Developing the Theory of Formative Assessment.  
Educ Asse Eval Acc 21: 5–31. doi: 10.1007/s11092-008-9068-5.
Stiggins, R. J. & Popham, W. J. (2008). Assessing Students’ Affect Related to Assessment 
For Learning: An Introduction for Teachers.  Retrieved from 
 Ø http://datause.cse.ucla.edu/library_results.php?q=oph&c=&id=618#618
  
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
45
T eaching notes for  
representative syllabus 1
Student Teachers complete a course in child development in the first year of their 
programme. Depending on their need for review, you may not need to go in depth 
on theories of child development or topics such as special needs. Gardner’s theory, 
included in this syllabus, has been challenged by research. In teaching about the 
theory of multiple intelligences, be sure to help Student Teachers critique it and 
recognize its limits.
 
NOTE: The session plans should be read in conjunction with the representative syllabus.
Unit 1: Introduction to educational psychology
Essential knowledge questions
• What is the basic concept of educational psychology?
• What are different principles of educational psychology?
• How can theoretical perspectives be used in the field of  
 e ducational psychology?
Possible practical activities
Conduct the following activities to provide hands-on experience to Student Teachers 
in relation to the course:
• Share relevant websites and other sources for reading.
• Prepare a list of educational implications resulting from the use of  
 ed ucational psychology in school education.
• Collect views of schoolchildren of varying ages in relation to their  
 o wn physiological development.
Week 1: Introduction to the course
 } Sample session
The session will start with the course introduction. Once the course has been 
outlined, share learning expectations with the class as well as information about 
course assessment and grading policy. Later in the session, the meaning of 
educational psychology and its concepts will be discussed by examining a case study 
and reflecting on Student Teachers’ own experiences in the authentic classroom 
context.
Introduction
The first two weeks will focus on how educational psychology can increase student 
achievement. 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
46
Brainstorming 
Write the meaning and principles of educational psychology on the board. Let 
Student Teachers explain their understanding of the meaning and concept of 
educational psychology. Write down all the responses derived from the discussion.
Writing definitions in small groups 
Divide Student Teachers into four groups. Ask each group to write a definition 
of educational psychology in their own words based on ideas elicited during the 
brainstorming session and their own experiences. 
Instructor’s input
Review the definitions from at least four groups and link them with different 
definitions of educational psychology from the literature. Help Student Teachers 
rephrase their definitions if necessary. 
During this portion of the class, be sure to emphasize educational psychology 
concepts and the principles of educational psychology derived from different schools 
of psychology. 
Week 2: Scope and application of educational  
psychology in the classroom
 } Sample session
Initiate a discussion on the meaning and concepts of educational psychology. (This 
can act as a review of the material covered in week 1.) Later, use the think, pair, share 
technique to encourage Student Teachers to discuss the assigned reading on the scope 
of educational psychology. They should share their understanding with the whole class. 
Towards the end, elaborate on the scope of educational psychology by presenting it 
from various perspectives. 
Assigned reading
This is a reading on the nature and scope of educational psychology. 
 Ø http://johnparankimalil.wordpress.com/2012/03/09/meaning-nature-and- 
scope-of-educational-psychology/
Week 3: Branches of educational psychology and the 
relationship between educational psychology and other 
disciplines
 } Sample session
Think, pair, share (Option 1)
For this class, prepare a short handout to distribute for this activity. Use the 
information provided on http://www.innovateus.net/innopedia/what-educational-
psychology-0 to create the handout. 
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
47
Student Teachers will gather in small groups or pairs to discuss the relationship 
between educational psychology and other disciplines. They will then present their 
work to the whole class. 
Distribute the handouts, continue the discussion in small groups or pairs on the 
relationship between educational psychology and other disciplines, and share a 
graphical representation of such relationships.
Role play (Option 2)
Role play is a classroom simulation technique. A well-constructed role-play activity 
can help highlight real-world issues through which students can become deeply 
involved in a topic. 
Details of using a role play as a teaching strategy can be downloaded from:
 Ø http://serc.carleton.edu/introgeo/roleplaying/index.html
Unit 2: Learner development 
Essential knowledge questions
• What is the effect of home, family, school, and teachers on students’  
 social development?
• Why are creativity and critical thinking essential for the development  
 of students’ cognition?
• What are different ways that students develop moral and ethical values? 
Possible practical activities
Some practical activities to teach the content of this unit might include:
• read-reflect-share and discuss
• tour guide for an alien
• fact or fiction.
Details on these and other critical thinking activities can be found on the  
following sites:
• http://homeworktips.about.com/od/paperassignments/a/Critical-Thinking- 
 Exercises.htm 
• http:/ /www.collegesuccess1.com/ThinkingM.htm
Week 4: Home, family, school, and teacher as factors 
in social development
Suggested strategies
• Whole-class discussion 
• Pair work
• Cooperative learning 
• Individual work
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
48
 } Sample session
Introduction
Conduct a short discussion session to introduce the topic.
Instructor’s input
Use the interactive lecture technique to introduce the effects of early social 
development on students. Encourage Student Teachers to share their childhood 
memories. Reinforce the principles of human development with the help of Student 
Teachers’ experiences.
Group activity
Divide Student Teachers in four groups, and assign a topic from the lesson to each 
group to discuss.
Ask each group to create a presentation on the impact of home, family, school, or 
teacher, using concept sketches (sketches or diagrams that are concisely annotated 
with short statements that describe the processes, concepts, and interrelationships). 
Ask each group to share their work with the whole class. 
Week 5: Critical thinking, creativity, assessing creativity, and 
creativity in the classroom 
 } Sample session
While working in small groups, Student Teachers will critically analyse a case. The 
Instructor can either develop cases or look for real-life cases about issues that will 
encourage critical thinking by Student Teachers. In Pakistan, the media often report 
on a wide range of issues such as corporal punishment, the energy crisis, and human 
rights. Student Teachers should investigate specific cases related to these or other 
issues, and suggest ways to improve the situation. They should consider what the 
case is about, who is involved, the issues, different perspectives, and why the case is 
important.
Alternatively, the jigsaw strategy can be used as a method for Student Teachers to 
work on different case studies. Divide the class into small groups, with each group 
working on a case study. Once the groups have analysed the cases, they will be 
reshuffled to form new mixed-ability groups. In these new groups, members share 
their learning from the previous group. Please consult the following link for further 
details about the jigsaw strategy: 
 Ø http:/ /serc.carleton.edu/NAGTWorkshops/coursedesign/tutorial/jigsaw.html
Based on Student Teachers’ insights, which can be narrowed down through 
questions, conduct a whole-class discussion on critical thinking. 
To encourage reflective thinking, Student Teachers will maintain reflective journals 
and record what they learn from the sessions and from readings.
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
49
Week 6: Lawrence Kohlberg’s theory of moral development
Suggested strategies
• Pair work
• Individual work 
• Cooperative learning (jigsaw reading)
 } Sample session
Divide students into small groups. Distribute copies of ‘The Heinz Dilemma’ 
(available from http:/ /www.vtaide.com/blessing/Kohlberg.htm). Give Student 
Teachers 15 minutes to read scenarios 1–3 and discuss their opinions in their groups.
Set some ground rules relating to listening to each other and practising social skills 
during and after the discussion.
Bring the groups together as a whole class so that groups can share their opinions 
and defend their reasoning by giving examples. Other groups will be encouraged 
to critically analyse opinions shared by the presenters, ask questions, and suggest 
alternatives based on reasoning. (It is important to note that at this stage, the process 
is more important than whether responses are correct or incorrect.)
After the presentations, introduce stages of Kohlberg’s theory of moral development 
through a presentation (using PowerPoint or overhead transparencies) or through 
handouts. The levels of moral development according to Kohlberg include:
• Level 1, pre-conventional morality
¡¡ Stage 1: Punishment–Obedience Orientation
¡¡ Stage 2: Instrumental Relativist Orientation
• Level 2, conventional morality
¡¡ Stage 3: Good Boy–Nice Girl Orientation
¡¡ Stage 4: Law and Order Orientation
• Level 3, post-conventional morality
¡¡ Stage 5: Social Contract Orientation
¡¡ Stage 6: Universal Ethical Principle Orientation.
Details of the levels of Kohlberg’s moral development stages can be found on the 
following websites:
• ‘Kohlberg’s Theory of Moral Development: Stages of Moral Development’
 Ø http://psychology.about.com/od/developmentalpsychology/a/kohlberg.htm
• ‘Kohlberg’s Stages of Moral Development’
 Ø http:/ /www.usefulcharts.com/psychology/kohlberg-stages-of-moral-
development.html
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
50
Unit 3: Learning theories and their application 
Essential knowledge questions
• What are different elements and principles of learning?
• Given the different theories, how do perspectives on learning concepts vary?
• How does the knowledge of learning help teachers facilitate the learning  
 process and enhance self-efficacy among students?
Week 7: Introduction to learning and learning theories  
(Piaget, Skinner, and Gestalt)
 } Sample sessions
Sample session (Option 1)
Divide the class into groups of four or five, depending on the total number of class 
participants. Introduce the topic by positing a series of self-reflection questions such 
as the following: 
• Think of your school experience. What is a process that helped you master a  
  skill (e.g. cooking, singing, writing, or even completing an assignment)?
• Who facilitated this experience? How did that person do it? Was it an  
 exciting experience? Why or why not? 
• What evidence supports your argument?
Give Student Teachers 10 minutes to write a response to these questions and then 
share and discuss their responses with their groups. 
Next, ask the groups to write main points from their discussions and then present 
them to the whole class. (If chart paper is available, they can create a chart for their 
presentations.) Highlight the indicators or components of learning from the main 
points presented and encourage participants to create their own definition of learning. 
Each group will develop one definition, write it on a chart paper, and display it for a 
gallery walk. During the gallery walk, encourage Student Teachers to respond to the 
charts by writing comments and suggestions to make the definitions comprehensive 
and reader friendly. 
Sample session (Option 2)
Give the members of each group handouts, URLs, and/or books about the three 
learning theories. Ideally, these resources should be provided prior to the class. On 
the session day, divide the class into small groups. The Student Teachers will use 
these materials to prepare a presentation. 
During the presentation, Student Teachers will take notes or write questions to ask once 
the presentation is over. Presenters can use any framework or mode of presentation, 
such as PowerPoint, overhead transparencies, charts, videos, and handouts. 
When the presentation task is assigned, share assessment rubrics with the groups. 
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
51
Week 8: Learning theories (Vygotsky and Bandura) and  
principles of learning 
 
 } Sample session
In continuation of the previous week’s work, Student Teachers will present the 
theories of learning. On the last day, the focus of the session will be the principles  
of learning. 
Week 9: Different approaches to learning (social and 
humanistic)
 } Sample session 1
Share a case study developed or modified from the following source: http:/ /www .
usask.ca/education/coursework/802papers/Skaalid/casestudy.html. Alternatively, 
share the link with Student Teachers if it is feasible.
Give Student Teachers 15 minutes to review the case study, and then ask them to 
write the main points on flash cards. Conduct a whole-class discussion. 
After the display of all the flash cards, highlight main components or elements of the 
constructivist approach and generate an interactive discussion.
 } Sample session 2
Divide Student Teachers into groups of four and share the following scenario with 
them:
You are at an interview for a job at a school with a large number of students from 
lower socio-economic backgrounds. The principal asks, ‘At our school, some of our 
students live in troubled environments or family environments that are not very 
socially sound, and some are refugees or from new immigrant families with financial 
difficulties. Considering the problems these students experience in their lives, how 
will you engage them in their studies?’
Task
Give Student Teachers 30 minutes to discuss and deliberate on the above scenario in 
their small groups. 
Next, engage the Student Teachers in a debate. (The Instructor plays the role of the 
moderator.) Share the guidelines and ground rules for effectively administering 
the debate. Use the information on pedagogy related to case studies ( ht t p ://s e r c .
carleton.edu/introgeo/icbl/index.html) and engaging in debates ( ht t p ://s e r c .
carleton.edu/files/NAGTWorkshops/coursedesign/tutorial/debates.doc) to guide 
the session.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
52
Assessment
Select a few principles identified or highlighted during the discussion of different 
learning theories.
Give one principle to each group so that they can design an activity for secondary 
school students that applies the highlighted principle. 
Allocate 30 minutes for preparation and discussion and then 8 minutes for each 
group to present to the whole class. 
Share the rubrics and criteria for assessment with the Student Teachers before 
the presentation. Suggest that Student Teachers consider self-assessment and peer 
assessment in the design of their activity.
NOTE: The information for units 1–3 offers a complete sample of planning notes that can 
be used as a reference point. For Units 4 and 5, only essential knowledge questions and 
suggested resources are provided.
Unit 4: Attributes of a learner: Intelligence, motivation, 
and metacognition    
Essential knowledge questions
• What is intelligence?
• How are metacognition and the theory of multiple intelligences similar 
  o r different?
• How can teachers use different techniques of motivation in the classroom 
  t o promote learning?
Student readings
Weiner, B. (2000). Interpersonal and Intrapersonal Theories of Motivation from an 
Attribution Perspective.  Educational Psychology Review , 12, 1–14.
Metacognition
Papaleontiou-Louca, E. (2008). Metacognition and Theory of Mind.  Newcastle, UK: 
Cambridge Scholars Publishing. Available from:
 Ø www.c-s-p.org/flyers/9781847185785-sample.pdf
Schraw, G. & Moshman, D. (1995). Metacognitive Theories. Educational Psychology 
Review, 7, 351–371. Available from:
 Ø http:/ /digitalcommons.unl.edu/edpsychpapers/40
Motivation 
Eggen, P & Kauchak, D. (2004). Educational Psychology: Windows on Classroom.  
(4th ed.) Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Woolfolk, A. E. (2010). Educational Psychology (11th ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
53
W eb resources
‘Howard Gardner’s Multiple Intelligences: A Theory for Everyone’
 Ø http://www.educationworld.com/a_curr/curr054.shtml/
‘Evolutionary Psychology and Intelligence Research’ by S. Kanazawa
 Ø http:/ /personal.lse.ac.uk/Kanazawa/pdfs/AP2010.pdf
‘A Theory of Intelligence as Processing: Implications for Society’ by J. F. Fagan III
 Ø http:/ /www.psy.cmu.edu/~rakison/fagan.pdf
‘McClelland’s Human Motivation Theory: Discovering What Drives Members of 
Your Team’ 
 Ø http://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/human-motivation-theory.htm
‘Theories of Motivation’
 Ø http://psychology.about.com/od/psychologytopics/tp/theories-of-motivation.htm
Unit 5: Role of educational psychology in assessment 
and evaluation
Essential knowledge questions
• What are the different types of assessment procedures? 
• What are alternative, authentic, and performance assessments?
• How are rubrics used in authentic and performance assessments?
Student readings 
Black, P. (1998). Formative Assessment: Raising Standard. School Science Review,  80, 
39–46. Available from 
 Ø http://blog.discoveryeducation.com/assessment/files/2009/02/blackbox_article.pdf
Black, P. & Wiliam, D. (2009). Developing the Theory of Formative Assessment. Educ 
Asse Eval Acc, 21. 5–31. doi: 10.1007/s11092-008-9068-5.
Black, P. & Wiliam, D. (1998). Assessment and Classroom Learning. Assessment in 
Education, 5, 7–74.
Framingham, J. (2011). Types of Psychological Testing, Psych Central. 
 Ø http://psychcentral.com/lib/2011/types-of-psychological-testing  
accessed 10 July 2012.
Stiggins, R. J. (2007). Assessment Crisis: The Absence of Assessment for Learning, Phi 
Delta Kappan, 83, 758–765. Available from
 Ø  http:/ /www.edtechpolicy.org/CourseInfo/edhd485/AssessmentCrisis.pdf
Stiggins, R. J. & Popham, W. J. (2008).  Assessing Students’ Affect Related to Assessment 
For Learning: An Introduction for Teachers. Retrieved from 
 Ø http://datause.cse.ucla.edu/library_results.php?q=oph&c=&id=618#618
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
54
REPRESENTATIVE SYLLABUS 2
Prepared by 
Sadaf Naz
Year, semester
Year 3, semester 5
Credit value 
3 credits (48 contact hours)
Prerequisite
Successful completion of semesters 1–4
Course description
The major objective of  the Educational Psychology course is to provide Student 
Teachers with information on the core principles of  teaching and learning, how to 
use these principles to understand the behaviour of  students, and to consistently 
apply these principles to classroom practice. The purpose of  this course is also to 
develop learners’ insight. This course will help Student Teachers understand different 
psychological concepts by examining their own learning and applying these concepts 
as teachers. The course concentrates on core concepts and principles as well as the 
central ideas of  educational psychology . Topics include the nature and function of  
educational psychology , learning theories, memory and forgetting, intelligence, 
behaviourist and social cognitive views of  learning, intrinsic and extrinsic motivation, 
measurement, and evaluation.
Course objectives 
By the end of  the course, Student Teachers should be able to: 
• describe in detail the multidisciplinary nature and function of educational  
 psychology 
• define learning and develop critical thinking about the behaviourist and  
 cognitive views of learning
• help students understand the relationship between educational psychology  
 and other disciplines 
• define information processing
• define motivation and explain its role in learning
• compare and contrast intrinsic and extrinsic motivation
• incorporate the different theories of intelligence in their teaching
• define individual differences.
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
55
Course content
The course content will be covered within one semester (year 3, semester 5) and 
contains four units. Relevant topics will be covered in each unit.
Unit 1: Introduction to Educational Psychology 
• Introduction to the Educational Psychology course
• The nature of Educational Psychology 
• The scope of Educational Psychology 
• The importance of Educational Psychology for teachers
• The relationship between Educational Psychology and other disciplines
Unit 2: Learning and information processing 
• Introduction to learning 
• Elements of learning
• Principle of learning
• Learning theories 
• Behaviourist views of learning
¡¡ Classical conditioning
¡¡ Operant conditioning
• Cognitive views of learning
¡¡ Social cognitive theory
• Approaches to learning
¡¡ Social approach
¡¡ Humanistic approach
¡¡ Information processing 
• The process of information
Unit 3: Motivation 
• Introduction to motivation 
• Definition of motivation
• The role of motivation in learning
• Types of motivation
¡¡ Intrinsic motivation
¡¡ Extrinsic motivation
• The role of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation in the classroom
• Comparing intrinsic and extrinsic motivation
• Motivational techniques for the classroom
• Maslow’s theory of motivation
• The implications of Maslow’s theory of motivation in classroom
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
56
Unit 4: Intelligence 
• Concept of intelligence 
• Definition of intelligence
• Theories of intelligence: An overview
• Multiple intelligences theory
• The implications of multiple intelligences theory
• Definition of individual differences
• The importance of individual differences
• Overview of physical, emotional, social, and mental differences
¡¡ Physical disabilities
¡¡ Mental retardation
¡¡ Emotional disturbances
¡¡ Socially disadvantaged
¡¡ Gifted learners
T eaching methodology
Teaching methods for this course will include interactive lectures, question and 
answer, group discussion, and brainstorming.
T extbooks and references 
The course will draw on textbooks, journal articles, and websites. A list of  these will 
be distributed in class. 
Assessments
A variety of  assessment techniques will be used, including exams, assignments, and a 
portfolio. Each of  the following assessments will account for the listed percentage of  
Student Teachers’ final marks:
• midterm exam: 15%
• final exam: 55%
• internal evaluations: 30% 
¡¡ assignments: 10%
¡¡ presentation: 10%
¡¡ attendance, portfolio, and tests: 10%.
Grading policy
University grading policy , the details of  which will be provided in class, will be followed. 
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
57
Resources
The following resources may be helpful for choosing appropriate readings. You 
may include your chosen list of  readings on the syllabus or distribute it in class. 
However, readings should include only those resources that you expect students to 
use throughout the course. Other readings should be distributed as they are needed. 
Identify specific chapters from recommended books and relevant websites. Some 
materials that may be helpful are listed below .
Ormrod, J. (2010). Educational Psychology: Developing Learners. Columbus, OH: Pearson. 
Santrock, J. W . (2001). Educational Psychology. Blacklick, OH: McGraw-Hill. 
Eggen, P & Kauchak, D. (2004). Educational Psychology: Windows on Classroom. (4th ed.) 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Web resources
This website has many special features to help locate articles, images, presentations 
and other resources in the area of  educational psychology .
 Ø www.googlescholar.com
The Motivation Tool Chest contains information and self-education resources that are 
free to download. 
 Ø www.motivation-tools.com
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
58
T eaching notes for 
representative syllabus 2
Unit 1: Introduction to educational psychology
Week 1: Introduction to the course
 } Sample session (Option 1)
Brainstorming (10 minutes) 
Write major terms related to the course on the board and ask Student Teachers to 
discuss their understanding of  these terms. Write down all the meanings they identify . 
Instructor’s input (20 minutes)
Review the major concepts of  educational psychology , along with relevant points 
highlighted by Student Teachers, and include classroom examples. Present salient 
features of  all topics covered in the Child Development course, including the nature 
and development of  individual personality , learning theories, teaching methods, 
motivation, and social and moral development. Relate this to the definition, scope, and 
importance of  educational psychology . 
Whole-group discussion (20 minutes) 
Divide the class into small groups of  three to five Student Teachers. Ask the Student 
Teachers to summarize and write the salient features. Note ideas that are repeated or 
have consensus.
Syllabus review (10 minutes)
Hand out copies of  the syllabus to the class. Ask the Student Teachers to review it and 
critically analyse various sections. Point out that they will discover new and different 
approaches to teaching and learning that may feel uncomfortable at first but will soon 
become familiar and enjoyable.
 } Sample session (Option 2)
Give a brief  introduction to educational psychology . Information on the following 
topics can be found on the listed websites, some of  which offer PowerPoint 
presentations:
• education: http://freedownload.is/ppt/what-is-psychology-2723662.html
• psychology: http:/ /freedownload.is/ppt/chapter-1-introduction-to-
psychology-8499815.html 
• educational psychology
¡¡ http://www.squidoo.com/educationalimportance
¡¡ http:/ /freedownload.is/ppt/educational-psychology-definitions-221571.html
Group activity
Divide the class into three groups and assign each a topic from Unit 1 of  the educational 
psychology syllabus. Give the groups 25 minutes to share their understanding of  the 
topic with each other and prepare a report on their points of  agreement. After, each 
group will present their work to the entire class.
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
59
Take the final five minutes of  class to conclude the discussion and relate the points 
made by each group to the topic as a whole.
 } Sample session: Definition of educational psychology
Class brainstorming (10 minutes)
Write educational psychology on the board and ask Student Teachers for their 
definition of  the term.
Write down all the meanings that have been identified on the board.
Group brainstorming (10 minutes) 
Divide the class into three groups and ask them to review the meanings generated 
in the class brainstorming session. From the information on the board, each group 
should prepare a comprehensive definition of  learning, motivation, and intelligence. 
Instructor’s input (30 minutes) 
Review major definitions of  learning, motivation, and intelligence, and include input 
from the Student Teachers’ group brainstorming. Also, provide information on the 
history and definition of  educational psychology , including reference to relevant 
theorists. 
Discussion (10 minutes) 
Ask Student Teachers to discuss the major definitions of  educational psychology with 
each other. 
Week 2: Nature of educational psychology
 } Sample session: Nature of educational psychology
Group discussion and presentation (40 minutes) 
Divide the class into small groups. Give each Student Teacher a handout on the nature 
of  educational psychology . The Student Teachers should take 20 minutes to read the 
handout individually and then discuss it in their small groups. During the discussion, 
they should organize their main points.
Following the discussion, each group will present its main points and summarize their 
discussion.
Note that it will be necessary to prepare a handout before this class session. Consider 
using the information on the following websites to prepare materials for this session:
• ‘Scope of Educational Psychology’ 
 Ø http:/ /www.pcer.ac.in/B.Ed.%20notes/Paper%202%20Section%201/
UNIT%20I.pdf
• ‘Meaning, Nature and Scope of Educational Psychology’ by John Parankimalil
 Ø http:/ /johnparankimalil.wordpress.
com/2012/03/09meaning-nature-and-scope-of-educational-psychology/
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
60
Instructor’s input (20 minutes) 
Sum up the Student Teachers’ discussions and further elaborate on the nature of  
educational psychology with suitable examples. 
 } Sample session: Scope of educational psychology
Class brainstorming (10 minutes)
Conduct a brainstorming activity by asking the following questions:
• What is meant by the word scope?
• To what does the scope of educational psychology refer?
Small-group activity (20 minutes) 
Divide the class in small groups. Ask Student Teachers to prepare a concept map on 
the scope of  educational psychology on chart paper. 
Instructor’s input (20 minutes)
Give input on the scope of  educational psychology . Ask the Student Teachers 
questions and have them contribute to the lecture.
Small-group activity (10 minutes)
Have the Student Teachers return to their small groups and ask them to revisit their 
concept map to determine whether it should be modified. They may add or delete 
items. 
Week 3: The importance of educational psychology for 
teachers
 } Sample session
Brainstorming (10 minutes) 
Ask the following questions about the importance of  educational psychology for 
teachers:
• To what extent is the knowledge of educational psychology necessary  
 for teachers?
• How can a teacher apply the knowledge of educational psychology in  
 the teaching-learning process? 
Pair-share activity (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to share their understanding of  the importance of  educational 
psychology with the person sitting next to them. When a few minutes remains, bring 
the class back together for a brief  discussion on the main points.
Small-group activity (20 minutes)
Divide the class into small groups and ask the Student Teachers to discuss the 
importance of  educational psychology . They should prepare a list during the 
discussion, which they will be asked to share with the whole class. 
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
61
Instructor’s input (20 minutes)
Provide input on the importance of  educational psychology and ask the groups 
to share the points they discussed in the small-group activity . Point out that the 
knowledge of  psychology is very important for teachers, as this knowledge can help 
them address social, emotional, and physical problems faced by students. 
Educational psychology also has a great role in teachers helping students through 
guidance and counselling. The following points might be discussed to highlight the 
importance of  educational psychology for teachers: 
• Educational psychology enables teachers to understand the mental status  
 of their students.
• Educational psychology helps teachers evaluate their students’ performance.
• Educational psychology helps teachers change their attitudes towards  
 students.
• Educational psychology produces new theories of learning for better education.
• Educational psychology helps teachers modify student behaviour, so that they  
 behave positively in different situations.
 } Sample session: The relationship between educational psychology 
 and other disciplines
Group discussion (30 minutes) 
Divide the class into small groups. Give Student Teachers a handout on the relationship 
between educational psychology and other disciplines. Give Student Teachers 20 
minutes to read the handout on their own and then discuss it their groups and reflect on 
text. As they discuss the text, they should prepare a list of  main points for presentation.
Following the discussion, each group will present its main points and summarize their 
discussion.
Instructor’s input (30 minutes) 
Sum up the presentation and elaborate on the relationship between educational 
psychology and other disciplines. Main points may include any of  the following: 
• educational psychology and school organization
• educational psychology and children with special needs
• educational psychology and mental health
• educational psychology and learning
• educational psychology and social adjustment
• educational psychology and personality development 
• educational psychology and different stages of growth
• educational psychology and guidance and counselling
• educational psychology and teaching methods
• educational psychology and evaluation
• educational psychology and curriculum
• educational psychology and teachers.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
62
UNIT 2: Learning and information processing
Week # Session # T opics/themes
4 Session 10 Introduction to learning
Session 11 Elements of  learning
Session 12 Principles of  learning
5 Session 13 Learning theories
Session 14 Behaviourist views of  learning
Session 15 Behaviourist views of  learning: Classical conditioning
6 Session 16 Behaviourist views of  learning: Operant conditioning
Session 17 Cognitive views of  learning
Session 18 Cognitive views of  learning: Social cognitive theory
7 Session 19 Approaches to learning
Session 20 Approaches to learning: Social approach
Session 21 Approaches to learning: Humanistic approach
8 Session 22 Approaches to learning: Information processing
Session 23 The process of  information
Session 24 Principles of  information processing: Advanced organizers, 
recall previous work, and post-discussion synthesis
2
Week 8: Approaches to learning: Information processing 
 } Sample session
Give a brief  introduction of  the topic ‘What is learning?’ and discuss different 
approaches to learning. 
Show a video on cognitive process. (An appropriate video can likely be found on 
YouTube.)
Alternatively , provide individual reading handouts on information processing. One 
possible reading may be Huitt’s ‘The Information Processing Approach to Cognition’, 
available from http://www .edpsycinteractive.org/topics/cognition/infoproc.html. 
Ask Student Teachers to read the handouts and then conduct a whole-class discussion.
After watching the video or reading the text, conduct a class dialogue on different 
approaches to learning. 
Conclude the session and add examples to explain different concepts of  information 
processing. 
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
63
UNIT 3: Motivation
Week # Session # T opics/themes
9 Session 25 Introduction to motivation
Session 26 Definition of  motivation
Session 27 The role of  motivation in learning
10 Session 28 Types of  motivation
Session 29 Types of  motivation: Intrinsic motivation
Session 30 Types of  motivation: Extrinsic motivation
11 Session 31 The role of  intrinsic and extrinsic motivation in the classroom
Session 32 Comparing intrinsic and extrinsic motivation
Session 33 Motivational techniques for the classroom
12 Session 34 Motivational techniques for the classroom
Session 35 Maslow’s theory of  motivation
Session 36 The implications of  Maslow’s theory of  motivation in the 
classroom
3
Week 10: Types of motivation: intrinsic and extrinsic motivation
 } Sample session
Small-group discussion and gallery walk (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to work in small groups to prepare a profile of  a famous 
personality . They should discuss this individual’s key successes or failures as well as 
the motivations for those successes or the reasons for failures. Each group will display 
their profile and prepare a summary of  the group discussion for the whole class. 
Student presentations (30 minutes)
Divide Student Teachers into four small groups; two groups will read a handout on 
internal motivation and two will read a handout on external motivation. 
Ask each group to prepare a five-minute presentation on the assigned topic and present 
it to the whole class. (You will need to be clear about whether the presentation is to 
be given in this session or later. If  it is to be presented in this session, you will have to 
determine what activities to eliminate in order to make time.)
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
64
Small-group activity: Reflection (20 minutes)
In light of  the famous personality discussed during the first part of  the class, ask 
Student Teachers to reflect on the motivation and address the following questions: 
• What could a teacher do to enhance students’ internal motivation towards  
 learning and behavioural changes?
• How can students who lack motivation use their abilities towards learning? 
Homework
Ask Student Teachers to write a brief  essay on the impact of  external motivational 
factors on learners.
Week 11: Motivational techniques for the classroom
 } Sample session
Introduction to the topic (5 minutes)
Introduce the topic by reviewing the previous work done on intrinsic and extrinsic 
motivation.
Self-reflection (5 minutes)
Student Teachers will reflect on their own experiences and write a response to one or 
more of  the following questions:
• How can you motivate students to do work or change their willingness to work?
• Does motivation play a role in achieving a goal?
• How can a teacher motivate the learners who lack motivation to learn?
Pair work (15 minutes)
Give Student Teachers five minutes to share their responses to the self-reflection 
questions with a partner. They should consider the importance and functions of  
motivation in learning and teaching, and develop a link between previous material 
and the new topic. This can be done through brainstorming.
Presentation: Effective motivational strategies and techniques (30 minutes)
Present effective motivational strategies and techniques to Student Teachers. To make 
the session interactive, pause after each strategy to ask Student Teachers to highlight 
the implications of  a motivational strategy in a classroom situation.
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
65
If  you prepare a PowerPoint presentation or use overhead transparencies, consider 
including the following strategies and techniques in your presentation:
 
Motivational strategies and techniques
• Extrinsic reward and  
 punishment
• Praise and blame 
• Novelty
• Arousing interest
• Curiosity 
• Mode of presentation
• Goals 
• High and realistic   
 expectations 
• S ecuring attention and  
 cr eating enthusiasm 
• Attitude in moti vation
• Success v ersus failure
• P ositive versus   
 negative
• Self-moti vation and   
 will to lear n
• Quality of     
 environment 
• Dri ve for    
 self-actualization 
• Clear f eedback  
• Acti ve involvement
• Ca pitalize on student  
 interest
• A void creating intense  
 competition among   
 students
• Be enthusiastic about  
 the subject
• Application of  various  
 teaching methods
• R espect for    
 personality
Group brainstorming and discussion (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to work in small groups to discuss the importance of  using 
strategies and techniques of  motivation while teaching. After the discussion, each 
group will be asked to share their main points with the whole class.
NOTES ON MOTIVATION: Learning and motivation are interrelated – in fact, motivation 
is a vital element to the learning process. It is important in the process of change and 
construction of knowledge because it influences a student’s willingness to make intangible 
changes. Researchers and theorists define two main types of motivation: extrinsic and 
intrinsic. Thus, students may be internally or externally motivated to learn. 
Different theorists classify human motives into different categories. For instance, infants’ 
early behaviour is largely determined by basic biological needs – a child cries when 
hungry, cold, or in pain. But as a child grows, new motives appear that are learned by in-
teracting with others; these are psychological motives. Maslow’s theory of motivation looks 
at the relationship among motives and the opportunities afforded by the environment.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
66
UNIT 4:  Individual differences and intelligence
Week # Session # T opics/themes
13 Session 37 Concept of  intelligence
Session 38 Definition of  intelligence
Session 39 Theories of  intelligence: An overview
14 Session 40 Theories of  intelligence: An overview
Session 41 Multiple intelligences theory
Session 42 The implications of  multiple intelligences theory
15 Session 43 Definition of  individual differences and its significance  
for teachers 
Session 44 The importance of  individual differences
Session 45 Overview of  physical, emotional, social, and mental 
differences
16 Session 46 Physical disabilities
Learning disabilities
Session 47 Emotional disturbances
Socially disadvantaged
Session 48 Gifted learners
4
Week 13: Intelligence: Definition of intelligence 
 } Sample session
Introduction to the new topic (5 minutes)
Briefly introduce the new topic.
Self-reflection (10 minutes)
Intelligence is an important trait of  the human personality and one that makes us 
unique. Ask Student Teachers to reflect on their own experiences and concepts about 
intelligence. 
Instructor’s input (30 minutes)
Discuss the concept of  intelligence and differences in intelligence among students. 
Think, pair, share (15 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to work in pairs and discuss intelligence traits. Then, ask several 
pairs to share one trait with the whole class and explain how it reflects intelligence. 
Use the final five minutes of  class to summarize the discussion and further elaborate 
different points if  needed.
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
67
Week 15: Definition of individual differences and its significance 
for teachers 
 } Sample session
Introduction to the new topic (5 minutes) 
Provide a brief  introduction to the topics and highlight the following points:
• the meaning, nature, and definition of individual differences 
• how knowledge about individual differences is essential for teachers
• the roles teachers can play to effectively cater to individual differences  
 among students.
Instructor’s input (35 minutes) 
Discuss the following points with Student Teachers:
• the meaning and nature of individual differences
• areas of individual differences, including physical, psychological, and  
 cognitive abilities
• causes of individual differences, such as genetic and environmental causes.
Group discussion (15 minutes)
Divide Student Teachers into small groups. Ask each Student Teacher to prepare a list of  
their own traits and determine whether those attributes have been influenced by genetic 
or environmental factors. After five minutes, they will share this list with their group.
 
Conclusion (5 minutes)
Briefly summarize all the points discussed.
NOTES ON INTELLIGENCE: Every field of life, whether it is education, social and physical 
science, literature, or art is influenced by intelligence. Intelligence enables an individual to 
adjust and adapt to a new environment. This unit will explore the concept of intelligence 
and different theories of intelligence. Student T eachers will learn to: 
• incorporate Gardner’s theory of multiple intelligences into their teaching 
• compare and contrast the ways in which students from various cultural and  
 ethnic groups are apt to be alike and different from one another 
• identify the implications of these differences for classroom practice.
Sternberg believes that intelligence is comprised of three separate but interrelated abilities: 
analytical, creative, and practical. Details on this theory are available from
 Ø http://www.edpsycinteractive.org/topics/cogsys/intell.html .
Further information on individual differences is available from
 Ø http://personality-project.org/revelle/publications/ids.html .
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
68
Integrated 
teaching notes
4
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
69
During the curriculum development process, contributing faculty were encouraged 
to keep notes that would be useful to others who may teach this course in the future. 
These were submitted along with the course syllabi. Teaching notes include ways 
to introduce the course, ideas for teaching units and sessions, sample lessons plans, 
and suggestions for reading and resource material. These have been integrated into a 
single section of  this document to create a rich and varied collection of  ideas that is 
easily accessible to others. The section is organized by theme. Except in cases where 
there is duplication of  ideas, faculty are credited with their contribution. 
 
Sample session 1: Understanding  
educational psychology: The history and 
development of educational psychology 
Unit learning outcomes 
Knowledge Skills Behaviours
History and development 
of  educational psychology
Drawing a timeline
Defining terms
Developing a glossary of  
terms
Describe, explain, and 
draw the timeline through 
group presentations
At the end of  the session, Student Teachers will be able to: 
 l describe the historical development of educational psychology by drawing  
 a  timeline
 l develop a glossary of terms identified as important for understanding  
 h istorical development 
 l explain how these terms apply to current understanding and usage. 
Materials required
• Flip charts
• Copies of handouts on the development of educational psychology 
 ( see suggested resources below) 
• Bulletin board or wall (somewhere to post Student Teachers’ work)
• Thumbtacks 
• Markers (different colours)
• Whiteboard or blackboard
Strategies 
• Think, pair, share
• Small-group discussions 
• Small-group presentations 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
70
Introduction 
Divide Student Teachers in small groups and give everyone a copy of  the handout 
on the development of  educational psychology . The information on the following 
websites can be used to prepare relevant handouts:
• Educational Psychology Interactive: Audio-Video Materials Related to  
 Educational Psychology http:/ /www.edpsycinteractive.org/materials/ 
videos.html
• Discovering Psychology  
 http://www.learner.org/series/discoveringpsychology/index.html
• History of Psychology 
 http://www.learner.org/series/discoveringpsychology/history/ 
history_flash.html
Development 
Give Student Teachers four small flash cards or strips that can be kept for future use. 
Working in the same small groups, each Student Teacher should select four terms 
from their handout and write its meaning on the flash card or strip of  paper. 
Student Teachers should post their cards to create a visual glossary . They should 
also type up the definitions of  the terms they selected and then work with peers to 
compile a glossary of  terms to which they can refer. 
 
Next, Student Teachers will read, discuss, and analyse the handout on the development 
of  educational psychology (through a jigsaw reading activity if  the handout is long). 
Working in the same small groups, each Student Teacher should create a timeline on 
a flip chart of  one era of  development based on the handout. After 15–20 minutes, the 
groups should attach their charts together on a soft board or a wall so that the entire 
class can see the development of  educational psychology from the 19th century to 
the present. In this way all the group members (whole class) will come to know the 
history of  educational psychology . 
Have each group present their timeline, and then engage in an interactive discussion 
and provide feedback to reinforce the ideas presented.
Discussion questions
• In retrospect, what is the role of the history of educational psychology in  
 shaping our understanding about human behaviour? 
• Why do we study educational psychology?
• Why is it important for Student Teachers to study educational psychology?
• How do the theories and knowledge of educational psychology apply in  
 daily classroom practices?
Assessment/assignment 
The presentation of  the timeline will be assessed using scoring rubrics, which will be 
developed and shared with the class beforehand. A sample rubric is available from
 Ø http://dnowlan.ca/VM/science7/Ecology/Concept%20Rubric.htm.
As part of  the informal assessment, a quiz can also be given to Student Teachers to 
check their understanding.
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
71
Sample session 2: Educational  
psychology schools of thought
Contributed by T arique Bhatti and Maroof Bin Rauf
Duration 
3 hours
Unit learning outcomes
Knowledge Skills Behaviours
Schools of  psychology Critical thinking
Analytical reasoning 
Differentiate and compare 
different schools; give 
examples based on 
experience
At the end of  the session, Student Teachers will be able to: 
 l discuss the given case studies in groups and suggest alternatives to find 
 s olutions
 l explain different schools of thought of psychology by giving examples from  
 d aily life.
Strategies 
Materials required
• Flip charts
• Copies of handouts on the development of educational psychology 
 ( see suggestions within other sample sessions) 
• Markers (different colours)
• Whiteboard or blackboard
• Case study
• Think, pair, share
• Small-group discussions
• Small-group presentations
Introduction 
Discuss a case study with the class. The case study can be developed from ‘The Case 
of  Marsha Warren’, which is available from: 
 Ø http://www.mhhe.com/socscience/education/elliott/book/case-1.htm.
Introduce the topic after the case study has been discussed. 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
72
Also, these resources can be used for guidance on psychological development in 
historical perspectives: 
• Chapter 1, Educational Psychology: Effective Teaching, Effective Learning    
 (3rd ed.)  
 Ø http://www.mhhe.com/socscience/education/elliott/book/case.htm
• Basics of Structuralism and Functionalism
 Ø http:/ /video.about.com/psychology/Basics-of-Structuralism and-
Functionalism.htm
Development 
Present the information that will encourage Student Teachers to determine how 
to address the problems identified in the case. Use a handout or a presentation (e.g. 
PowerPoint slides or overhead transparencies), so that the information is clearly 
provided. Give the class 10 minutes to think about the issues on their own and then 
engage the class in a group discussion. Select a few of  the following or use all of  them:
• What are some of the facts in the case? 
• What are some of the important issues in the case?
• Who is involved with or related to the case?
• What is the problem? 
• When did the problem become out of control?
• In your opinion, why did the problem occur?
• What are some assumptions that have been made about this case? 
• How would you deal with these assumptions or with speculation? 
• How can you tackle this situation? 
• What conclusions can you draw about the case? 
After the discussion of  the case study , connect the case with the different schools 
of  psychology and provide a handout on the different schools. The handout should 
include the six modern schools – behavioural, cognitive, psychoanalytic, humanism, 
social, and biological – and two historical views (e.g. structuralism and functionalism).
Give Student Teachers 10 minutes to read the handout to prepare for a class discussion. 
While leading the discussion, draw and complete tables to organize the information 
(as in the Instruction section).
Instruction 
After reading the handout, invite Student Teachers to revisit the case study and see if  
their conception of  the problem has changed or remained the same. They will identify 
instances, events, or moments where any of  the schools of  thought can be applied. 
The following table can be used to place the instance (or memory) in the appropriate 
column. 
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
73
Historical schools of thoughts  
in psychology Events identified in the case
Structuralism
Functionalism
Modern schools of thoughts  
in psychology Events identified in the case
Behavioural
Cognitive
Biological
Humanism
Social
Discussion questions
Use the following questions to initiate the discussion: 
• If you choose to become a psychologist, which school of thought would you 
 p refer to adopt? Give your reasoning for your response. 
• How are the ideas of modern schools of thoughts in psychology similar to or  
 d ifferent from the historical views? Give your opinion with reasoning. 
Assessment/assignment 
Ask Student Teachers to write a two-page essay on one of  the two discussion 
questions above.
Sample session 3: The nature of  
educational psychology
Introduction (20 minutes)
Introduce the topic of  the course: the nature of  psychology and educational 
psychology . Provide an overview of  the course and highlight key areas from the 
syllabus such as course description, unit description, and learning outcomes. 
Discuss Student Teachers’ expectations regarding course assignments, class readings, 
tasks, and out-of-class activities. 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
74
Previous knowledge (10 minutes)
To gauge Student Teachers’ previous knowledge, ask them about the big ideas they 
discussed in the Child Development course.
Student Teachers will share different answers. For instance, some may refer to 
development and growth in children, such as social, cognitive, physical, and emotional 
development, while others may mention learning or individual differences. Based 
on the answers provided, ask the Student Teachers to highlight the big ideas of  the 
present course. Note the ideas highlighted by the Student Teachers and introduce the 
units of  the course to provide context. Spend time defining educational psychology 
and its role in education.
Small-group discussion (10 minutes)
Divide Student Teachers in small groups and have them develop a definition of  
educational psychology . They will then share their definition with the whole class. 
The Instructor should copy the definitions on the board and then help the class 
develop a comprehensive definition. 
Interactive lecture (10 minutes)
Give an interactive lecture on educational psychology . Ask the following questions:
• Can you name a few psychologists whose work you have read?
• Which doctors treat people who suffer from depression, fatigue, and anxiety?
• Which psychologists performed experiments on these pigeons, dogs,  
 and monkeys? 
To make the session interactive, add buzz activities in the session.
Summary (5 minutes)
At the end of  the session, summarize the topic.
Homework 
Ask Student Teachers to look for some of  the principles of  educational psychology 
such as self-efficacy , cooperative learning, and peer tutoring online or in psychology 
books. 
 
Learning process
Contributed by Liaquat Hussain, Sadia Suleman, and Dr Javed Iqbal 
 } Sample session 1: How do we learn?
Introduction and lecture (30 minutes) 
Introduce the unit and discuss the main points regarding the learning process. 
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
75
Reflection and reading (15 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to complete a brief  written reflection that addresses the 
following questions:
• What is learning? How do students learn?
• What are some of the learning theories? Provide a summary of some main  
 theories.
After the reflection, provide a handout on learning and ask Student Teachers to read 
it individually . A class discussion will follow .  
Class discussion (15 minutes)
Guide a class discussion in which Student Teachers share their written reflections 
and information gained from the reading. Review the main points and clarify by 
answering questions. Add information wherever required.
 } Sample session 2: Conceptual approaches to psychology
Introduction to the unit
Give a brief  introduction to the various conceptual approaches to educational 
psychology that highlights the following perspectives:
• the biological perspective
• the psychodynamic perspective
• the cognitive perspective
• the behavioural perspective
• the humanistic perspective
• the Gestalt perspective.
Details on different educational psychology perspectives are available from 
 Ø http://www.psychoid.net/overview-schools-thought.html.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
76
Suggested assignments
Contributed by Liaquat Hussain, Sadia Suleman, and Dr Javed Iqbal 
Four types of  coursework assignments are suggested. All can be used as is or adapted 
as needed. 
Assignment 1: Response paper
Write a response paper to the following:
Think of  any teacher or class you have taken that has made a particular impression on 
you. What was it about this experience that has stuck with you? When you reflect on 
this, begin to tie your thoughts together with the theories covered in this course, such 
as those of  Dewey , Piaget, Vygotsky , Erikson, Skinner, Maslow , and Gardner. 
This paper should also address the following questions: 
• How did these teachers ‘operationalize’ the theories we are now studying? 
• Did it make a difference in their teaching? 
• How did it advance the learning process in their classrooms? 
You can also focus your paper on your classroom observations and discuss what you 
are seeing in action as you visit classrooms. This response paper should critically reflect 
on issues and ideas presented by the theories you select, especially how a given theory 
has changed your view of  teaching. It should demonstrate how you were able to make 
meaning out of  these theories and how this meaning changed, deepened, or challenged 
your own thinking on what constitutes ‘good’ teaching. It should also discuss how you 
feel these ideas can be operationalized in the everyday practice of  teaching. 
Assignment 2: Analyse a research-based article on teaching and learning
Select a research-based article from a professional journal on educational psychology 
and analyse its various components. These components may include: 
• overall objective and rationale
• research hypothesis 
• methodology (subjects, research design, procedure) 
• results 
• usefulness to classroom practice 
• meaning for educational psychology. 
This critique should communicate your understanding of  the research presented and 
its purpose. It should also reflect a meaningful connection between the research and 
classroom practice. Feel free to comment on the results presented by the authors and 
how you feel they align with your own experience as a student and as a prospective 
teacher. 
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
77
You could, for example, discuss the article with in-service professionals you meet 
during your observations and include their reactions along with your own response. 
Please be sure to attach a copy of  the research article to your response paper. 
Assignment 3: Learning project
This will be a cooperative project to be completed in small groups or pairs. Begin 
by selecting a specific question related to a topic, issue, or concept on teaching and 
learning discussed during the course. Develop the chosen topic based on your own 
thoughts, impressions, and experiences and view it from multiple perspectives (be 
sure to include your observational fieldwork). Cite from the literature (e.g. books, 
professional journals and magazines, and websites) to help clarify and broaden 
your analysis. For example, you may wish to analyse various theories of learning, 
such as those of Piaget or Vygotsky, and what you feel are their implications for 
teaching and learning. Alternatively, you could discuss how enhancing emotional 
intelligence can maximize learning. Include accounts based upon your own personal 
and observational experiences. Another option is to delve into the psychology of 
standardized testing and the impact it has on teacher and student motivational levels. 
Whatever topic you choose, make sure that it intrigues and excites you, has some 
kind of educational psychology perspective, and supports your growth and progress 
as a teacher. 
Assignment 4: Observational fieldwork and reflective notes
This assignment requires at least 10 hours of observational fieldwork at schools in  
classes 1–8. Fieldwork must be planned ahead of visits; be sure to discuss your plans 
and what you hope to accomplish with your cooperating classroom teacher. The 
cooperating teacher must certify your 10 hours of observation at the end of the 
semester. Please keep a journal about your school visits in which you can record your 
responses, interactions, and reflections. 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
78
Educational 
psychology material 
and resources
5
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
79
References 
Coon, D. & Mitterer, J. O. (2007). Introduction to Psychology: Gateways to Mind and 
Behavior. Melbourne: Wadsworth.
Dash, N. & Dash, B. N. (2004). A Textbook of Educational Psychology  (4th ed.). New 
Delhi: Shipra Publications.
Mangal, S. K. (2007). Advanced Educational Psychology  (2nd ed.). New Delhi: Prentice 
Hall of India.
Plotnik, R. (2005). Introduction to Psychology  (7th ed.). Melbourne: Wadsworth.
Santrock, J. W. (2004). Life Span Development  (9th ed.). Boston: McGraw-Hill.
Woolfolk, A. E. (2010). Educational Psychology  (11th ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Critique of multiple intelligences theory
Although educators who support active learning strategies for children with 
differing learning needs have found Gardner’s work on multiple intelligences to 
be helpful, it has not been thoroughly critiqued. There are many researchers who 
support active learning, but who do not support Gardner’s theory. A rich collection 
of materials that can help you critique the work are available online and include:
• The Theory of Multiple Intelligences’ by Lynn Gilman 
 Ø http://www.indiana.edu/~intell/mitheory.shtml
• ‘Theory of Multiple Intelligences’ 
 Ø http:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theory_of_multiple_intelligences
Student Teachers need to be reminded that Gardner’s work is a descriptive theory 
based on his assumptions.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
80
Sample assessment rubrics
The following rubric can be used to grade Student Teachers’ performances. An alternative version is available at
 Ø http://dnowlan.ca/VM/science7/Ecology/Concept%20Rubric.htm
Criteria Beginner Progressing Proficient Expert
1 2 3 4
Use of 
resources
The prospective 
teacher has poorly 
demonstrated 
the skill of using 
appropriate and 
authentic resources 
in significant and 
insightful ways. The 
prospective teacher 
has poorly considered 
the university’s 
academic honesty 
policies, which 
include policies on 
cheating, plagiarism, 
and recycling.
The prospective 
teacher has 
demonstrated 
some skill of using 
appropriate and 
authentic resources 
in significant and 
insightful ways. The 
prospective teacher 
has shown some 
consideration of the 
university’s academic 
honesty policies, 
which include 
policies on cheating, 
plagiarism and 
recycling.
The prospective 
teacher has 
demonstrated a high 
level of skill of using 
appropriate and 
authentic resources 
in significant and 
insightful ways. 
Most of the time the 
prospective teacher 
has considered the 
university’s academic 
honesty policies, 
which include 
policies on cheating, 
plagiarism, and 
recycling.
The prospective 
teacher has 
demonstrated an 
outstanding skill of 
using appropriate and 
authentic resources 
in significant and 
insightful ways. The 
prospective teacher 
has also consistently 
considered the 
university’s academic 
honesty policies, 
which include 
policies on cheating, 
plagiarism, and 
recycling.
Development 
of points
The prospective 
teacher has poorly 
highlighted relevant 
and well-developed 
points through 
authentic literature 
sources, examples, 
or illustrations. The 
prospective teacher 
has stated some of his 
or her own analysis 
of the concepts 
and shown their 
implementation in the 
workplace setting.
Quite often, the 
prospective teacher 
has highlighted 
relevant and well-
developed points 
through authentic 
literature sources, 
examples, or 
illustrations. The 
prospective teacher 
has stated his or her 
own analysis of the 
concepts and shown 
their implementation 
in the workplace 
setting quite skilfully.
Most of the time, the 
prospective teacher 
has highlighted 
relevant and well-
developed points 
through authentic 
literature sources, 
examples, or 
illustrations. The 
prospective teacher 
has also stated his 
or her own analysis 
of the concepts very 
well and shown their 
implementation in the 
workplace setting.
The prospective 
teacher has 
highlighted relevant 
and well-developed 
points through 
authentic literature 
sources, examples, 
or illustrations. The 
prospective teacher 
has also stated his 
or her own analysis 
of the concepts in 
an expert manner 
and shown their 
implementation in the 
workplace setting.
Presentation The prospective 
teacher has presented 
the work using the 
given format (i.e. 
font, writing style, 
margins, spacing, etc.) 
with many mistakes.
The prospective 
teacher has presented 
the work using the 
given format (i.e. 
font, writing style, 
margins, spacing, etc.) 
with some mistakes.
The prospective 
teacher has presented 
the work using the 
given format (i.e. font, 
writing style, margins, 
spacing, etc.) with 
very few mistakes.
The prospective 
teacher has presented 
the work using the 
given format (i.e. 
font, writing style, 
margins, spacing, etc.) 
with no mistakes.
Adapted from: M.Ed.Lead courses taught at Notre Dame Institute of  Education (NDIE), Karachi. Used with permission. 
For educational purposes only .
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
81
Methods and 
strategies to  
use in planning
6
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
82
The following is a list of some of the strategies used in this course to encourage 
active learning. 
Active lecturing. An active lecture is not too different from any good lecture, but it 
attempts to directly involve listeners. 
There is no one best way to give an active lecture, but it involves any of the following 
techniques.
Give information in small chunks (about 10 minutes), and then have class members 
do something with that information for a few minutes. Here are some examples of 
activities, which you can repeat or vary:
• Write a one-minute reaction to what you have just heard. 
¡¡ Talk to the person next to you about what you heard and see how  
 your perspectives differ. Do you agree? Do you have questions?
• List as many key points as you can remember.
• Compare notes taken during the chunk. Help each other fill in gaps or  
 determine if crucial information is missing. (Some people do not allow note  
 taking during the lecture, but this is up to the Instructor.)
Give out cards or slips of paper in three different colours. When class members are 
listening to your comments, have them hold up a colour for ‘I understand’, ‘I don’t 
understand’, or ‘I disagree’. Then either stop and allow questions or adjust what 
you are saying so there are more ‘understand’ colours showing. This is particularly 
effective with large groups of 50 or more people.
Ambassadors. This is a useful way to get groups or individuals to exchange information. 
Two or more members move from one group to another to share/compare discussion 
etc. You may wish to have half of each group move to another group. This is especially 
useful if you do not have ample time for a whole-class discussion.
Brainstorming. This is a technique for generating creative ideas on a topic. It may be 
an individual activity or organized as a group activity. Give people a limited amount 
of time (e.g. one minute) to say or write as many ideas as they can on a topic. No 
matter how unrelated an idea seems, write it down. (Alternatively, the Instructor 
might ask the whole class to brainstorm and write all the ideas on the board.) After 
the brief period of brainstorming, ideas may then be analysed, organized, and 
discussed. This is often used as a problem-solving technique. Ideas are then analysed 
in light of how useful they might be in solving the problem. 
Gallery walk. This is a strategy that borrows its name from a visit to an art gallery. 
Students walk through an exhibit of posters, artefacts, or display of items they have 
completed. They can be directed to take notes. The idea is to thoughtfully look at 
what is displayed.
Graffiti wall. A graffiti wall may be displayed in the classroom for use all term. Students 
may write their thoughts, feelings, or expressions before or following each session and 
sign their name. Anonymous comments are not suitable. Ideas generated in class may 
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
83
be posted on the ‘wall’. Use paper from a large roll of craft or newsprint paper or join 
several cardboard boxes together to make a wall that can be stored between sessions. 
Students can take turns getting and putting away the wall each session.
Group work: some tips for forming instructional groups. There is no one best way to 
form groups. The best way for you is the way that suits your purpose. Use a more 
complicated strategy if students need a break or need to be energized. Use a simple 
technique if time is short. Ways to form groups include the following:
• Ask people to count off from one to five (depending on the number of people  
 you want in a group). Groups will form based on their number (e.g. all of the  
 ones will gather together).
• Before class, determine how many people you want in a group or how many  
 groups you need. Give each class member a different coloured sticker, star, or  
  dot as they enter the class. Then when it is time to form groups, ask them to  
 find people with the same sticker etc. and sit together.
• Put different coloured bits of paper in a cup or jar on each table. Have people  
  take one and find people in the room with the same colour to form a group.
• Have students get together with everybody born in the same month as  
 they were. Make adjustments to the groups as needed.
Mini-lecture. A mini-lecture contains all the components of a good lecture. It is 
sharply focused. It begins with an introduction that provides an overview of what 
you will talk about. It offers examples and illustrations of each point. It concludes 
with a summary of the main point(s). 
One-minute paper. Ask class members to write for one minute on a particular topic 
(e.g. their reflections on a topic, an assigned subject). They are to focus on writing 
their ideas, without worrying about grammar and spelling. A one-minute paper 
differs from brainstorming because there is more focus. 
Pair-share. Use this technique when you want two class members to work together 
to share ideas or accomplish a task. Simply ask them to work with a neighbour or 
have them find a partner based on some other criteria. It is very useful when you 
want people to quickly exchange ideas without disrupting the flow of the class. 
(Sharing in triads and foursomes are also small group techniques.)
Poster session. This is useful when you want students to organize their thoughts on 
a topic and present it to others in a quick but focused way. Have individuals or small 
groups work to create a poster to explain or describe something. For example, if they 
have been doing an inquiry on a particular topic, they would want to include their 
focus, methods, and outcomes, along with colourful illustrations or photographs. 
The poster can be self-explanatory or students can use it to explain their work. As an 
in-class tool, a poster session is often combined with a gallery walk so that the class 
may review a number of posters in a short time.
Readers’ theatre. readers’ theatre is a group dramatic reading from a text. Readers take 
turns reading all or parts of a passage. The focus is on oral expression of the part being 
read rather than on acting and costumes. readers’ theatre is a way to bring a text to life. 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
84
It is a good idea to go over passages to be read aloud with students so they are 
familiar with any difficult words. 
Sometimes readers’ theatre is used to get student interested in a text. They hear 
passages read first and then read the longer text. 
KWL. This is a strategy that provides a structure for recalling what students know 
(K) about a topic, noting what students want to know (W), and finally listing what 
has already been learned and is yet to be learned (L).
The KWL strategy allows students to take inventory of what they already know and 
what they want to know. Students can categorize information about the topic that 
they expect to use as they progress through a lesson or unit.
Text-against-text. This is a way of helping students learn to analyse and compare 
written documents. The idea is to look at two documents and search for overlap, 
confirmation, or disagreement. It is a way of looking at different perspectives. 
Sometimes it is useful to give students readings prior to class and ask them to 
compare the readings based on a set of study questions, such as:
1. Look at each author separately. What do you think the author’s main point is? 
2. How does the author support his/her argument? 
3. Look at the authors together. In what ways do the authors agree? 
4. What are their points of disagreement?
5. What is your opinion on the issue? 
Text-against-text may be used to compare a new reading or new information with 
material that has already been covered. 
In classrooms where the whole class uses a single textbook, Instructors often find 
they are teaching against what is in the textbook. Sometimes it is hard for students to 
accept that a textbook can and should be questioned. Putting together a text-against-
text activity using the textbook and outside materials (e.g. an article) can help them 
understand that there are legitimate differences of opinion on a subject. Articles 
need not contradict each other. They may be about the same topic, but offer students 
different ways of seeing a subject.
Another way to use the activity is divide the class into groups, give each a set of 
materials, and have them debate the texts. Some university faculty like to put 
together text sets that include both scholarly and non-scholarly works and have 
students think about differences. For example, you might provide all students – 
regardless of their reading level or learning style – with easy-to-read materials as 
a way to introduce themselves to a topic. Even competent adult learners seek out 
‘easy’ books or materials to learn about a new or complex topic. Providing a picture, 
newspaper article, or even a children’s book in a text set might give everyone the 
means of connecting to or understanding some aspect of the larger subject. 
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
85
Roundtable technique. For this technique, divide the class into small groups (i.e. 
four to six people), with one person appointed as the recorder. A question that has 
many possible answers is posed, and class members are given time to think about 
the answers. After the thinking period, members of the team share their responses 
with one another. The recorder writes the group’s answers. The person next to the 
recorder starts and each person in the group (in order) gives an answer until time is 
called. 
Quizzes. Prepare and give a short quiz (15 minutes) over the different aspects of child 
development covered in the unit. As students take the quiz, ask them to circle items 
they are unsure of. They can review and discuss their work in the following ways:
• Triads. Have students meet in groups of three to review the quizzes so that  
 they can help each other with their weak areas. (10 minutes)
• Review. Go over the quiz with students, and have them look at their own  
 work and make corrections. (30 minutes)
¡¡ Notice points class members had difficulty remembering and take time to  
 review them. You may ask students to assist with this and discuss how they  
  were able to remember.
¡¡ Use this time to correct any misconceptions.
¡¡ Have students save their quiz for future study.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
86
Articles and  
readings
7
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
87
Reading 1
Individual Differences
Used by permission of  the author. [For classroom use only]
An entry for the Encyclopedia of  Psychology (in press) 
Kazdin, A.E. (Editor). 
William Revelle 
Department of  Psychology 
Northwestern University 
Evanston, Illinois 
Email: revelle@northwestern.edu 
That people differ from each other is obvious. How and why they differ is less clear and 
is the subject of the study of Individual differences (IDs). Although to study individual 
differences seems to be to study variance, how are people different, it is also to study 
central tendency, how well can a person be described in terms of an overall within-
person average. Indeed, perhaps the most important question of individual differences 
is whether people are more similar to themselves over time and across situations 
than they are to others, and whether the variation within a single person across time 
and situation is less than the variation between people. A related question is that of 
similarity, for people differ in their similarities to each other. Questions of whether 
particular groups (e.g., groupings by sex, culture, age, or ethnicity) are more similar 
within than between groups are also questions of individual differences. 
Personality psychology addresses the questions of shared human nature, dimensions 
of individual differences and unique patterns of individuals. Research in IDs ranges 
from analyses of genetic codes to the study of sexual, social, ethnic, and cultural 
differences and includes research on cognitive abilities, interpersonal styles, and 
emotional reactivity. Methods range from laboratory experiments to longitudinal 
field studies and include data reduction techniques such as Factor Analysis and 
Principal Components Analysis, as well as Structural Modeling and Multi-Level 
Modeling procedures. Measurement issues of most importance are those of 
reliability and stability of Individual Differences. 
Research in Individual Differences addresses three broad questions: 1) developing 
an adequate descriptive taxonomy of how people differ; 2) applying differences in 
one situation to predict differences in other situations; and 3) testing theoretical 
explanations of the structure and dynamics of individual differences. 
Taxonomies of individual differences:
Taxonomic work has focused on categorizing the infinite ways in which individuals 
differ in terms of a limited number of latent or unobservable constructs. This is a multi-
step, cyclical process of intuition, observation, deduction, induction, and verification 
that has gradually converged on a consensual descriptive organization of broad classes 
of variables as well as on methods for analyzing them. Most of the measurement and 
taxonomic techniques used throughout the field have been developed in response to 
the demand for selection for schooling, training, and business applications. 
S
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
88
Test Theory
Consider the case of differences in vocabulary in a particular language (e.g., 
English). Although it is logically possible to organize people in terms of the specific 
words they know in English, the more than 2^(500,000) possible response patterns 
that could be found by quizzing people on each of the more than 500,000 words in 
English introduces more complexity rather than less. Classical Test Theory (CTT) 
ignores individual response patterns and estimates an individual’s total vocabulary 
size by measuring performance on small samples of words. Words are seen as 
random replicates of each other and thus individual differences in total vocabulary 
size are estimated from observed differences on these smaller samples. The Pearson 
Product Moment Correlation Coefficient (r) compares the degree of covariance 
between these samples with the variance within samples. As the number of words 
sampled increases, the correlation of the individual differences within each sample 
and with those in the total domain increases accordingly. 
Estimates of ability based upon Item Response Theory (IRT) take into account 
parameters of the words themselves (i.e., the difficulty and discriminability of each 
word) and estimate a single ability parameter for each individual. Although CTT 
and IRT estimates are highly correlated, CTT statistics are based on decomposing 
the sources of variance within and between individuals while IRT statistics focus 
on the precision of an individual estimate without requiring differences between 
individuals. CTT estimates of reliability of ability measures are assessed across 
similar items (internal consistency), across alternate forms, and across different 
forms of assessment as well as over time (stability). Tests are reliable to the extent 
that differences within individuals are small compared to those between individuals 
when generalizing across items, forms, or occasions. CTT reliability thus requires 
between subject variability. IRT estimates, on the other hand, are concerned with 
the precision of measurement for a particular person in terms of a metric defined by 
item difficulty. 
The test theory developed to account for sampling differences within domains can 
be generalized to account for differences between domains. Just as different samples 
of words will yield somewhat different estimates of vocabulary, different cognitive 
tasks (e.g., vocabulary and arithmetic performance) will yield different estimates of 
performance. Using multivariate procedures such as Principal Components Analysis 
or Factor Analysis, it is possible to decompose the total variation into between domain 
covariance, within domain covariance, and within domain variance. One of the most 
replicable observations in the study of individual differences is that almost all tests 
thought to assess cognitive ability have a general factor (g) that is shared with other 
tests of ability. That is, although each test has specific variance associated with content 
(e.g., linguistic, spatial), form of administration (e.g., auditory, visual), or operations 
involved (e.g., perceptual speed, memory storage, memory retrieval, abstract 
reasoning), there is general variance that is common to all tests of cognitive ability. 
Personality and Ability
Although to some the term personality refers to all aspects of a person’s individuality, 
typical usage divides the field into studies of ability and personality. Tests of ability 
are viewed as maximal performance measures. Ability is construed as the best one 
can do on a particular measure in a limited time (speed test) or with unlimited 
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
89
time (power test). Personality measures are estimates of average performance and 
typically include reports of preferences and estimates of what one normally does and 
how one perceives oneself and is perceived by others. 
The same procedures used to clarify the structure of cognitive abilities have been 
applied to the question of identifying the domains of personality. Many of the early 
and current personality inventories use self-descriptive questions (e.g., do you like to 
go to lively parties; are you sometimes nervous) that are rationally or theoretically 
relevant to some domain of interest for a particular investigator. Although there 
is substantial consistency across inventories developed this way, some of this 
agreement could be due to conceptually overlapping item pools. Other researchers 
have advocated a lexical approach to the taxonomic problem, following the basic 
assumption that words in the natural language describe all important individual 
differences. This shifts the taxonomic question from how are individuals similar and 
different from each other to how are the words used to describe individuals (e.g., 
lively, talkative, nervous, anxious) similar and different from each other. 
Dimensional analyses of tests developed based on lexical, rational, or theoretical 
bases suggest that a limited number (between three and seven) of higher order 
trait domains adequately organize the thousands of words that describe individual 
differences and the logically infinite way that these words can be combined 
into self or peer report items. The broadest domains are those of introversion-
extraversion and emotional stability-neuroticism, with the domains of agreeableness, 
conscientiousness and intellectual openness or culture close behind. These domains 
can be seen as asking the questions that one wants to know about a stranger or a 
potential mate: are they energetic and dominant (extraverted), emotionally stable 
(low neurotic), trustworthy (conscientious), loveable (agreeable), and interesting 
(intelligent and open). 
Measures of ability and personality reflect observations aggregated across time and 
occasion and require inferences about stable latent traits thought to account for the 
variety of observed behaviors. However there are other individual differences that 
are readily apparent to outside observers and require little or no inference about 
latent traits. The most obvious of such variables include sex, age, height, and weight. 
Differences that require some knowledge and inference are differences in ethnicity 
and social economic status. These obvious group differences are sometimes analyzed 
in terms of the more subtle measures of personality and ability or of real life 
outcomes (e.g, sex differences in neuroticism, mathematics ability, or income). 
Predictive Validity
Individual differences are important only to the extent that they make a difference. 
Does knowing that people differ on a trait X help in predicting the likelihood of their 
doing behavior Y? For many important outcome variables the answer is a resounding 
yes. In their review of 85 years of selection in personnel psychology, Frank Schmidt 
and John Hunter (Psychological Bulletin, 1998, 124, 262-274) show how differences 
in cognitive ability predict differences in job performance with correlations 
averaging about .50 for mid complexity jobs. These correlations are moderated by 
job complexity and are much higher for professional-managerial positions than they 
are for completely unskilled jobs. In terms of applications to personnel psychology, 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
90
a superior manager (one standard deviation above the mean ability for managers) 
produces almost 50% more than an average manager. These relationships diminish 
as a function of years of experience and degree of training. General mental ability (g) 
also has substantial predictive powers in predicting non-job related outcomes, such 
as likelihood of completing college, risk for divorce and even risk for criminality. 
The non-cognitive measures of individual differences also predict important real 
life criteria. Extraversion is highly correlated with total sales in dollars among 
salespeople. Similarly, impulsivity can be used to predict traffic violations. 
Conscientiousness, when added to g substantially increases the predictability of job 
performance. Although the size of the correlation is much lower, conscientiousness 
measured in adolescence predicts premature mortality over the next fifty years. 
Sources of individual differences
The taxonomic and predictive studies of individual differences are descriptive 
organizations of thoughts, feelings, and behaviors that go together and how they 
relate to other outcomes. But this categorization is descriptive rather than causal and 
is analogous to grouping rocks in terms of density and hardness rather than atomic 
or molecular structure. Causal theories of individual differences are being developed 
but are in a much earlier stage than are the descriptive taxonomies. 
Descriptive taxonomies are used to organize the results of studies that examine 
genetic bases of individual differences. By applying structural modeling techniques 
to the variances and covariances associated with various family constellations it is 
possible to decompose phenotypic trait variance into separate sources of genetic and 
environmental variance. The most common family configurations that are used are 
comparisons of identical (monozygotic) with fraternal (dizygotic) twins. Additional 
designs include twins reared together or apart, and biological versus adoptive 
parents, children and siblings. Conclusions from behavioral genetics for most 
personality traits tend to be similar: Across different designs, with different samples 
from different countries, roughly 40-60% of the phenotypic variance seems to be 
under genetic control with only a very small part of the remaining environmental 
variance associated with shared family environmental effects. Additional results 
suggest that genetic sources of individual differences remain important across the 
lifespan. However, this should not be taken to mean that people do not change as 
they mature but rather that the paths one takes through life are similar to those 
taken by genetically similar individuals. 
Genes do not code for thoughts, feelings or behavior but rather code for proteins 
that regulate and modulate biological systems. Although promising work has been 
done searching for the biological bases of individual differences it is possible to 
sketch out these bases only in the broadest of terms. Specific neurotransmitters and 
brain structures can be associated with a broad class of approach behaviors and 
positive affects while other neurotransmitters and structures can be associated with 
a similarly broad class of avoidance behaviors and negative affects. Reports relating 
specific alleles to specific personality traits emphasize that the broad personality 
traits are most likely under polygenic influence and are moderated by environmental 
experience. 
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
91
Subtle differences in neurotransmitter availability and re-uptake vary the sensitivity 
of individuals to cues about their environment that predict future resource 
availability and external rewards and punishments. It is the way these cues are 
detected, atttended to, stored, and integrated with previous experiences that makes 
each individual unique. Current work on the bases of individual differences is 
concerned with understanding this delicate interplay of biological propensities with 
environmental opportunities and constraints as they are ultimately represented in 
an individual’s information processing system. With time we can expect to increase 
our taxonomic and predictive power by using these causal bio-social theories of 
individual differences. 
References: 
• Brody, N. and Ehrlichman, H. (1997) Personality Psychology : Science of  
 Individuality. Prentice Hall Press; A thoughtful introduction to the broad field  
 of personality. Cooper, C. (1997) Individual Differences: London: Arnold A  
 broad overview of the field that includes a review of measurement  
 methodologies. 
• Eysenck, H.J. (1994) Personality: Biological foundations. In P.A. Vernon (Ed.)  
 The neuropsychology of individual differences. London: Academic Press. 
• Eysenck, H.J. and Eysenck, M.W (1985) Personality and individual differences:  
 a natural science approach. Plenum: New York. Although dated, perhaps the  
 best treatment of the scientific method as applied to the study of personality  
 and individual differences. 
• Hogan, R., Johnson, J. & Briggs, S. (Eds) (1997) Handbook of Personality  
 Psychology. San Diego: Academic Press. The definitive handbook of the  
 field includes chapters on evolutionary, biological, and social bases of  
 individual differences. 
• Jensen, A.R. (1998) The G Factor : The science of mental ability. Westport,  
 Conn. Praeger Review of the importance of general intelligence for  
 performance on tasks. 
• Loehlin, J.C. (1992) Genes and environment in personality development.  
 Newbury Park, Ca. Sage. A concise tutorial on genetic modeling and  
 personality taxonomies. 
• Saklofske, D. H. & Zeidner, M. (1995). International handbook of  
 personality and intelligence. New York: Plenum. 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
92
Reading 2
Individual Differences and Differential 
Psychology: A brief history and prospect
Used by permission of the author. [For classroom use only]
William Revelle 
Joshua Wilt David 
M.Condon
Northwestern University
Differential psychology has been a central concern to philosophers and psychologists, 
both applied and theoretical, for the past several millennia. It remains so today. 
he proper study of individual differences integrates methodology, affective and 
cognitive science, genetics and biology. It is a field with a long history and an exciting 
future. We review some of the major questions that have been addressed and make 
suggestions as to future directions.
This handbook is devoted to the study of individual differences and differential 
psychology. To write a chapter giving an overview of the field is challenging, for 
the study of individual differences includes the study of affect, behavior, cognition, 
and motivation as they are affected by biological causes and environmental events. 
That is, it includes all of psychology. But it is also the study of individual differences 
that are not normally taught in psychology departments. Human factors, differences 
in physical abilities as diverse as taste, smell, or strength are also part of the study 
of differential psychology. Differential psychology requires a general knowledge 
of all of psychology for people (as well as chimpanzees, dogs, rats and fishes) differ 
in many ways. Thus, differential psychologists do not say that they are cognitive-
psychologists, social-psychologists, neuro-psychologists, behavior geneticists, 
psychometricians, or methodologists, for although we do those various hyphenated 
parts of psychology, by saying we study differential psychology, we have said we do 
all of those things. And that is true for everyone reading this handbook. We study 
differential psychology. Individual differences in how we think, individual differences 
in how we feel, individual differences in what we want and what we need, individual 
differences in what we do. We study how people differ and we also study why people 
differ. We study individual differences.
There has been a long recognized division in psychology between differential 
psychologists and experimental psychologists (Cronbach, 1957; H. J. Eysenck, 1966), 
however, the past 30 years has seen progress in integration of these two approaches 
(Cronbach, 1975; H. J. Eysenck, 1997; Revelle & Oehleberg, 2008). Indeed, one of the 
best known experimental psychologists of the 60’s and 70’s argued that “individual 
differences ought to be considered central in theory construction, not peripheral” 
(Underwood, 1975, p 129). However, Underwood (1975) went on to argue (p 134) 
that these individual differences are not the normal variables of age, sex, IQ or social 
status, but rather are the process variables that are essential to our theories. Includ- 
ing these process variables remains a challenge to differential psychology.
S
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
93
OVERVIEW OF DIFFERENTIAL PSYCHOLOGY
The principles of differential psychology are seen outside psychology in computer 
science simulations and games, in medical assessments of disease symptymatology, 
in college and university admissions, in high school and career counseling centers, as 
well as in applied decision making.
Early Differential Psychology and its application
Differential psychology is not new for an un- derstanding of research methodology 
and individ- ual differences in ability and affect was described as early as the Hebrew 
Bible in the story of Gideon (Judges 6, 7). Gideon was something of a skeptic who had 
impressive methodological sophistication. In perhaps the first published example of a 
repeated measures, cross over design, he applied several behavioral tests to God before 
agreeing to go off to fight the Midians as instructed. Gideon put a wool fleece out 
on his threshing floor and first asked that by the next morning just the fleece should 
be wet with dew but the floor should be left dry. Then, the next morning, after this 
happened, as a cross over control, he asked for the fleece to be dry and the floor wet. 
Observing this double dissociation, Gideon decided to follow God’s commands. We 
believe that this is the first published example of the convincing power of a cross over 
interaction. (Figure 1 has been reconstructed from the published data.)
In addition to being an early methodologist, Gideon also pioneered the use of a 
sequential assessment battery. Leading a troop of 32,000 men to attack the Midians, 
Gideon was instructed to reduce the set to a more manageable number (for greater 
effect upon achieving victory). To select 300 men from 32,000, Gideon (again under 
instructions from God) used a two part test. One part measured motivation and 
affect by selecting those 10,000 who were not afraid. The other measured crystallized 
intelligence, or at least battlefield experience, by selecting those 300 who did not lie 
down to drink water but rather lapped it with their hands (McPherson, 1901).
Gideon thus combined many of the skills of a differential psychologist. He was a 
methodologist skilled in within subject designs, a student of affect and behavior as 
well as familiar with basic principles of assessment. Other early applications of psy- 
chological principles to warfare did not emphasize individual differences so much 
as the benefits of training troops of a phalanx (Thucydides, as cited by Driskell & 
Olmstead, 1989).
83 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Floor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wool
 
    
Moistur
e 
0.
0 
0.
2 
0.
4 
0.
6 
0.
8 
1.
0 
 
 REVELLE, CONDON, WILT 
 Early Differential 
Psychology and its 
application 
 
 
 
 
 
Differential psyc hology is not new for an un- 
derstanding of res earch met hodology and individ- 
ual di fferences in ab ility and a ffect was described 
as early as the Hebrew Bible in the story of Gide on 
(Judges 6, 7). Gideon was somethi ng of a skep tic 
who had impressive met hodological sophistication. 
In perhaps the first published example of a rep eated 
measures, cross over design, he a pplied several be- 
havioral test s to God before agr eei ng to go o ff to 
fight the Midians as instructed. Gideon put a w ool 
fleece out on his threshing fl oor and first asked that 
by the next morning just the fl eece should be wet 
with dew but the fl oor s hould be left dry. T hen, 
the next morni ng, after this ha ppened, as a cro ss 
over control, he asked for the fl eece to be dry a nd 
the fl oor wet. Ob serving this double di ssociation, 
Gideon d ecided to follow God’s co mmands. We 
believe that this is the first pub lis
hed example of 
the convincing power of a cro ss over inter action. 
(Figure 1 has been reconstructed from the published 
data.) 
 
In a ddition to being an early met hodologist, 
Gideon also pi oneered the use of a se quential as- 
sessment battery. Leading a troop of 32,000 men to 
attack the Midians, Gideon was instructed to re duce 
the set to a more m anageable number (for gr eater 
effect upon achieving victory). To sel ect 300 m en 
fr
om 32,000, Gideon (again under instructions from 
God) used a two part test. One part m easured mo- 
tivation and a ffect by sel ecting t hose 10,000 w ho 
were not a fraid. The other m easured crysta llized 
intelligence, or at least battlefield experience, by se- 
lecting those 300 who did not lie down to drink wa- 
ter but rather lapped it with their hands (McPherson, 
1901). 
 
Gideon t hus combined many of the sk ills of a 
differential psychologist. He was a met hodolog ist 
skilled in within subject designs, a student of affect 
and behavior as we ll as fam iliar with basic princi- 
ples of assessment. Other early applications of psy- 
chological principles to warfare did not emphasize 
individual di fferences so m uch as the benef its of 
training tr oops of a phalanx (Thucydides, as c ited 
by Driskell & Olmstead, 1989). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1  2 
 Night
 
 
 
Figure 1. Gideon’s tests for God are an early example of 
a double di ssociation and pr obably the first published 
example of a cross over interaction. On the first night, the 
wool was wet with dew but the floor was dry. On the sec- 
ond night, the floor was wet but the wool was dry (Judges 
6:36-40) 
 
 
 
Personality taxonomies 
 
That people differ is obvious. How and why they 
differ is the subject of taxonomies of personality and 
other individual differences. An ear ly and c ontinu- 
ing application of these ta xonomies is most clearly 
seen in the study of leadership effectiveness. Plato’s 
discussion of the pe rsonality and ab ility character- 
istics re quired for a philosopher king em phasized 
the multivariate pr oblem of the rare co-o ccurence 
of appropriate traits: 
 
... quick inte lligence, memory, sagac- 
ity, cleverness, and similar qualities, do 
not often grow t ogether, and that per- 
sons who possess them and are at the 
same tim
e high-spir ited and m agnani- 
mous are not so c onstituted by nature 
as to live orderly a nd in a p eaceful and 
settled manner; they are driven any way 
Gideon’s double dissociation test
Figure 1. Gideon’s tests for God are an early example of a double dissociation and probably 
the first published example of a cross over interaction. On the first night, the wool was wet 
with dew but the floor was dry. On the second night, the floor was wet but the wool was dry 
(Judges 6:36-40)
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
94
REVELLE, CONDON, WILT
Personality taxonomies
That people differ is obvious. How and why they differ is the subject of taxonomies 
of personality and other individual differences. An early and continuing application 
of these taxonomies is most clearly seen in the study of leadership effectiveness. 
Plato’s discussion of the personality and ability characteristics required for a 
philosopher king emphasized the multivariate problem of the rare cooccurence of 
appropriate traits:
... quick intelligence, memory, sagacity, cleverness, and similar qualities, 
do not often grow together, and that persons who possess them and are 
at the same time high-spirited and magnanimous are not so constituted 
by nature as to live orderly and in a peaceful and settled manner; they 
are driven any way by their impulses, and all solid principle goes out of 
them. ...
On the other hand, those steadfast natures which can better be depended 
upon, which in a battle are impregnable to fear and immovable, are 
equally immovable when there is anything to be learned; they are always 
in a torpid state, and are apt to yawn and go to sleep over any intellectual 
toil. ... And yet we were saying that both qualities were necessary in those 
to whom the higher education is to be imparted, and who are to share in 
any office or command. (Plato, 1991, book 6)
Similar work is now done by Robert Hogan and his colleagues as they study the 
determinants of leadership effectiveness in management settings (Hogan, 2007, 1994; 
Hogan et al., 1990; Padilla et al., 2007) as well as one of the editors of this volume, 
Adrian Furnham (Furnham, 2005). The dark side qualities discussed by Hogan could 
have been taken directly from The Republic.
A typological rather than dimensional model of individual differences was developed 
by Theophrastus, a student of Aristotle, who was most famous as a botanical 
taxonomist. However, he is known to differential psychologists as a personality 
taxonomist who organized the individual differences he observed into a descriptive 
taxonomy of “characters”. The characters of Theophrastus are often used to 
summarize the lack of coherence of early personality trait description, although it 
is possible to organize his “characters” into a table that looks remarkably similar to 
equivalent tables of the late 20th century (John, 1990; John & Srivastava, 1999).
1600 years after Theophrastus, Chaucer added to the the use of character descriptions 
in his “Cantebury Tales” which are certainly the first and probably the “best 
sequence of ‘Characters’ in English Literature” (Morley, 1891, pg 2). This tradition 
continued into the 17th century where the character writings of the period are 
fascinating demonstration of the broad appeal of personality description and 
categorization (Morley, 1891).
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
95
OVERVIEW OF DIFFERENTIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Causal theories
Tyrtamus of Lesbos, who was known as Theophrastus for his speaking ability, 
(Morley, 1891), asked a fundamental question of personality theory that is still of 
central concern to us today:
Often before now have I applied my thoughts to the puzzling question – one, 
probably, which will puzzle me for ever – why it is that, while all Greece lies 
under the same sky and all the Greeks are educated alike, it has befallen us to 
have characters so variously constituted.
This is, of course, the fundamental question asked today by differential psychologists 
who study behavior genetics (e.g., Bouchard, 1994, 2004) when they address the 
relative contribution of genes and shared family environment as causes of behavior.
Biological personality models have also been with us for more than two millenia, 
with the work of Plato, Hippocrates and later Galen having a strong influence. Plato’s 
organization of the tripartite soul into the head, the heart and the liver (or, alterna- 
tively, reason, emotion and desire) remains the classic organization of the study of 
individual differences (Hilgard, 1980; Mayer, 2001; Revelle, 2007). Indeed, with the 
addition of behavior, the study of psychology may be said to be the study of affect 
(emotion), behavior, cognition (reason) and motivation (desire) as organized by Plato 
(but without the physical localization!).
500 years later, the great doctor, pharmacologist and physiologist, Galen (129-c.a. 
216) organized and extended the earlier literature of his time, particularly the work 
of Plato and Hippocrates (c 450-380 BCE), when he described the causal basis of the 
four temperaments. His empirical work, based upon comparative neuroanatomy, 
provided support for Plato’s tripartite organization of affect, cognition, and desire. 
Although current work does not use the same biological concepts, the search for a 
biological basis of individual differences continues to this day.
1800 years later, Wilhelm Wundt (Wundt, 1874,1904) reorganized the Hippocrates/
Galen four temperaments into the two dimensional model later discussed by Hans 
Eysenck (H. J. Eysenck, 1965, 1967) and Jan Strelau (Strelau, 1998).
Early methodology
Besides the introduction of the cross over experiment by Gideon, Plato introduced 
two important concepts that would later find in an important role in psychometrics 
and the measurement of individual differences. The concept of True Score and of 
the distinction between observed and latent variables may be found in the Allegory 
of the Cave (Plato, 1991, Book 7). For just as the poor prisoners chained in the 
cave must interpret the world in terms of the shadows cast on the wall, so must 
psychometricians interpret individual differences in observed score as reflecting 
latent differences in True score. Although shadow length can reflect differences in 
height, it can also reflect differences in distance from the light. For the individual 
differences specialist, making inferences about true score changes based upon 
observed score differences can be problematic. Consider the increases in observed 
IQ scores over time reported by Flynn (1984, 1987, 2000), termed the Flynn effect. It 
may be asked, is the Flynn effect a real effect, and are people getting smarter, or are 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
96
REVELLE, CONDON, WILT
the IQ scores going up equivalent to a change in shadow length in the cave, due to a 
change in position but not of height in the realworld? This inferential problem is also 
seen in interpretations of fan-fold interactions as reflecting interactions at the latent 
level rather than merely at the observed level (Revelle, 2007).
T able 1
The characters of Theophrastus and the adjectives of the Big 5 show remarkable similarity. Big 5 adjectives 
from John (1990). The characters of Theophrastus are from Jebb’s translation of Theophrastus (1909).
Extraversion Agreeableness Conscientious Neuroticism Openness
talkative sympathetic organized tense wide interests
assertive kind thorough anxious imaginative
active appreciative planful nervous intelligent
energetic affectionate efficient moody original
-quiet -cold -careless -stable -commonplace
-reserved -unfriendly -disorderly -calm -simple
-shy -quarrelsome -frivolous -contented -shallow
-silent -hard-headed -irresponsible -unemotional -unintelligent
talker anxious to please hostile coward stupid
chatty flatterer shameless grumbler superstitious
boasful unpleasant distrustful boor
ironical feckless slanderer offensive
petty ambition tiresome penurious mean gross
arrogant outcast avaricious
garrulous complaisant Reckless
gossipy surley officious unseasonable
oligarch evil speaker patron of rascals
T able 2
Greek/Roman causal theory of  personality
Physiological Basis Temperament
Yellow Bile Choleric
Phlegm Phlegmatic
Blood Sanguine
Black Bile Melancholic
T able 3
Wundt’s two dimensional organization of  the 
four temperaments
Changeability Exciteability
Melancholic Choleric
Phlegmatic Sanguine
Differential Psychology in the Late 19th and early 20th centuries
Any discussion of differential psychology must include the amazing contributions of 
Sir Francis Galton. Besides considering the hereditary basis of ability (Galton, 1865, 
1892), or describing the results of an introspective analysis of the complexity of his own 
thoughts (Galton, 1879), or introducing the lexical hypothesis later made popular by 
Goldberg (1990) by searching the thesaurus for multiple examples of character (Galton, 
1884) he also developed an index of correlation in terms of the product of deviations 
from the median and the probable error of the estimate (Galton, 1888; Stigler, 1989). 
His measure of “reversion to the mean” was later modified to the form we now know 
as the Pearson Product Moment Correlation Coefficient (Pearson, 1896).
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
97
OVERVIEW OF DIFFERENTIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Galton believed in the power of data analysis, whether it was developing 
meteorological maps of Europe, the use of fingerprints for identification, or the 
dimensions of character (Galton, 1884)
... character ought to be measured by carefully recorded acts, representative of 
the usual conduct. An ordinary generalization is nothing more than a muddle 
of vague memories of inexact observations. It is an easy vice to generalize. We 
want lists of facts, every one of which may be separably verified, valued and 
revalued, and the whole accurately summed. It is the statistics of each man’s 
conduct in small everyday affairs, that will probably be found to give the 
simplest and most precise measure of his character. ... a practice of deliberately 
and methodically testing the character of others and of ourselves is not wholly 
fanciful, but deserves consideration and experiment. (Galton, 1884, p 185)
Expanding upon the work of Galton, Charles Spearman, in a remarkable pair of 
papers in 1904, introduced the correlation coefficient to psychologists as well as the 
concept of reliability and corrections for attenuation (Spearman, 1904b).
Psychologists, with scarcely an exception, never seem to have become 
acquainted with the brilliant work being carried on since 1886 by the Galton- 
Pearson school. The consequence has been that they do not even attain to 
the first fundamental requisite of correlation, namely a precise quantitative 
expression. (Spearman, 1904b, p 96)
In the next issue of the same journal, he then introduced factor analysis and 
suggested a general factor of ability (Spearman, 1904a). More than a century after 
these papers, much of differential psychology may be seen as a footnote to the work 
of Galton and Spearman.
The research of Gerard Heymans (1906) in the Netherlands unfortunately has not 
received the attention it deserves among American psychologists, for it is a classic 
set of studies on the structure of individual differences based upon observer ratings. 
Eysenck presented a very thorough review of Heymans work (H. J. Eysenck, 1992), 
as has Strelau (1998). van der Werff & Verster (1987) were reanalyzed the data 
using principal components analysis. Over 3,000 physicians were asked to rate the 
mem- bers of one family on six types of items. About 400 physicians responded. 
Strelau summarizes the results in terms of temperamental dimensions of activity, 
emotionality, and ‘primary vs. secondary functioning’. This later dimension may 
be taken as related to the temporal aspects of behavior and the speed of switching 
between activities (see Atkinson & Birch (1970); Fua et al. (2010) for a consideration 
of the temporal component). The original data have been reanalyzed by van der 
Werff & Verster (1987) and included 90 questions referring to 2,309 members of 
437 families. A five and three component solution were obtained. The components 
represented impulsivity versus thoughtfulness, activity (with two sub components 
of continuous activity and not easily daunted) and a component of ‘bad temper’ with 
items of trusting and unselfish versus imperious and irritable. Strelau (1998) gives 
these important studies the respect they deserve.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
98
REVELLE, CONDON, WILT
The early 20th century also saw the introduction of the IQ test (Binet & Simon, 
1905; Goddard, 1908; Terman, 1916), the hypothesis of a general factor of ability 
(Spearman, 1904a), and the introduction of ability (the Army Alpha) and emotional 
testing for military selection (Driskell & Olmstead, 1989; Jones & Thissen, 2007; 
Yerkes, 1918). Differential psychologists involved in the Army Alpha/Beta project 
included Terman, Otis, Thorndike, Thurstone and Whipple (Jones & Thissen, 
2007). Otis went on to develop a group intelligence scale, as did Terman. The 
subsequent years were active times for differential psychology, continuing on with 
the beginning of the landmark longitudinal study on high ability children (Terman, 
1925; Terman & Oden, 1947). It was also a time in which IQ tests were used to 
screen (non-English speaking) immigrants at Ellis Island in the United States and to 
argue for forced sterilization (Zenderland, 2001) for those with low scores.
Another researcher whose work has not been as appreciated by Americans as 
much as it should is the work of William Stern (1910, 1914). Not only laying out 
a theory of differences between individuals, Stern also emphasized the study of 
individuality which he wanted to reclaim from historical biographers (Stern, 1910). 
It is interesting to note that he was well aware of the problem of errors in memory 
that bias self reports of any kind. His lectures should be of interest to all interested 
in narrative approaches to the study of individuals. Stern is most known for his 
work on intelligence (Stern, 1914) where he developed the measure of intelligence as 
the ratio of mental age to chronological age. This ratio, when multiplied by 100, of 
course became the IQ score used in differential psychology before the change to the 
use of standard scores. To Stern
Intelligence is a general capacity of an individual consciously to adjust his 
thinking to new requirements: it is a general mental adaptability to new 
problems and conditions of life. ...
Finally, the fact that the capacity is a general capacity distinguishes intelli- 
gence from talent the characteristic of which is precisely the limitation of 
efficiency to one kind of content. He is intelligent, on the contrary, who is 
able easily to effect mental adaptation to new requirements under the most 
varied conditions and in the most varied fields. If talent is material efficiency, 
intelligence is a formal efficiency (Stern, 1914, pp 3-4).
Subsequent work on the structure of ability followed the introduction of matrix 
algebra to Thurstone (Thurstone, 1935, 1947) and thus into psychology (Bock, 2007). 
With the ability to work with matrices, the process of factor analysis of correlational 
‘tables’ became much simpler and the subsequent extraction of multiple factors of 
intellect more reasonable. Debates between ‘g’ theories (Spearman, 1946) versus 
multi-factor models (Thurstone,1933, 1935, 1947) versus sampling theories of intel- 
ligence (Bartholomew et al., 2009; G. H. Thomson, 1935; S. Thomson, 1951) filled 
the pages of journals and the shelves of libraries.
Outside of the ability domain, empirically driven test construction in the personality 
and interests domains proceeded with little regard to theories of underlying 
individual differences. This work led to the development and validation of items that 
could discriminate known occupational groups from people in general. The basic 
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
99
OVERVIEW OF DIFFERENTIAL PSYCHOLOGY
model was and is that if one shares interests with those in a particular occupation, 
that one is more likely to do well in that occupation (Strong, 1927). Interests show 
strong consistencies over the lifetime (Kelly, 1955) and have moderate predictive 
validities. More recently, two and three dimensional structural models have been 
applied to the interests as measured by the Strong (Armstrong et al., 2004; Donnay, 
1997). Interests in an occupation do not imply ability in that occupation (one can 
share interests with opera singers, but if a second monotone, unlikely to succeed).
Mid 20th Century: The high point of differential psychology?
The 1930’s saw the introduction of Psychometrika, the pages of which were soon filled 
with detailed discussions on reliability theory, factor analysis, and scale construction. 
Most of the work was on measuring ability and the primary debates were between 
methods of factor extraction, validity estimation and a general theory of tests.
With the publication of Gordon Allport’s text on personality (Allport, 1937), Henry 
Murray’s integration of multiple approaches to the study of personality (Murray, 
1938), and Clyde Kluckhohn and Murray’s integration of personality with society 
and culture (Kluckhohn & Murray, 1948), empirical personality research had finally 
reached the United States.
Following the onset of the second world war, differential psychologists were 
soon involved in the problems of selection and training. About 1500 psychologists 
were associated with the Army Air Force selection and training program. The 
list of differential psychologists involved includes many future presidents of the 
Psychometric society (Jones & Thissen, 2007) and leaders in differential psycholgy. 
The detailed final report of the project (Dubuis, 1947) is a primer on how to do 
validity studies. The point biserial validities for cognitive and psychomoter tests for 
predicting training success for e.g., pilots, navigators and bombardiers were roughly 
.45 across various samples and could be presented graphically in a manner that 
showed the powers of selection (Figure 2).
Differential psychologists primarily associated with personality and social psychology 
were also involved in selection, but for a more difficult criterion. Differential 
psychologists assisted with the selection of agents for the Office of Strategic Services 
(OSS) which later became the Central Intelligence Agency. Whereas the criteria for 
air force pilots was clear, the criteria for success as a spy proved to be more difficult 
to ascertain. The predictive validities actually diminished the longer the assessment 
procedure lasted (OSS Assessment Staff, 1948; Wiggins, 1973).
Three more ‘milestones in assessment’ and prediction involving differential psychology 
(Wiggins, 1973) were the American Veterans Administration selection of clinical 
psychology graduate students in the late 1940s (Kelly & Fiske, 1951), the selection of the 
first American astronauts, and the selection of Peace Corps Volunteers (Wiggins, 1973).
The conclusions from the VA selection study (Kelly & Fiske, 1950) are remarkably 
consistent with findings reported 50 years later about predicting graduate student 
success Kuncel et al. (2001): A mixture of ability and objectively assessed interests 
and personality variables predict graduate student success with roughly equal ( ≈ .25 
− .30) validities that when combined form a multiple R of about .4. More importantly 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
100
REVELLE, CONDON, WILT
and consistent with the OSS findings, complex assessments based upon the inter- 
actions of assessors with applicants have no incremental validity. That is, people who 
are more able, interested in psychology, and lack nervous tension and irritability 
are more likely to succeed in clinical training than the less able, less interested, and 
more nervous. Having long interactions with an assessment board does not add 
information to this combination of Ability, Interests, and Temperament (AIT).
88 
 
Percentage 
passing 0 20 40 60 80 10
0 
 
OVERVIEW OF DIFFERENTIAL PSYCHOLOGY  
 
and Murray’s integration of personality with society 
and culture (Kluckhohn & Murray, 1948), empirical 
personality res earch had finally r eached the Un ited 
States. 
Following the onset of the second world war, dif- 
ferential psyc hologists were s oon involved in the 
problems of sel ection and traini ng. A bout 1500 
psychologists were a ssociated w ith the Army Air 
Force sel ection and training pr ogram. The list of 
differential psyc holog ists involved incl udes many 
future presidents of the Psychometric society (Jones 
& Th issen, 2007) and l eaders in di fferential psy- 
cholgy. The deta iled final re port of the proj ect 
(Dubuis, 1947) is a primer on how to do va lidity 
studies. The point biserial va lidities for c ognitive 
and psyc homoter tests for predic ting training suc- 
cess for e.g., p ilots, navigators and bombardiers 
were roughly .45 across various samples and c ould 
be presented gra phica
lly in a manner that showed 
the powers of selection (Figure 2). 
Differential psyc hologists primar ily a ssociated 
with pe rsonality and social psyc hology were also 
involved in sel ection, but for a more di fficult crite- 
rion. Differential psychologists assisted with the se- 
lection of agents for the Office of Strategic Services 
(OSS) which later b ecame the Central Inte lligence 
Agency. Whereas the criteria for air force pilots was 
clear, the cr ite
ria for su ccess as a spy proved to be 
more difficult to ascertain. T he predictive validities 
actually diminished the l onger the a ssessment pro- 
cedure lasted ( OSS A ssessment Staff , 1948; Wig- 
gins, 1973). 
Three more ‘milestones in a ssessment’ and pre- 
diction involving differential psychology (Wiggins, 
1973) were the Ameri can Veterans Administra tion 
selection of clinical psychology graduate students in 
the late 1940s (Kelly & Fiske , 1951) , the sel ection 
of the first American astronauts, and the selection of 
Peace Corps V olunteers (Wiggins, 1973). 
The c onclusions from the V A sel ection st udy 
(Kelly & Fiske , 1950) are remarkably c onsistent 
with findings reported 50 y ears later a bout predict- 
ing gra duate st udent su ccess Kuncel et al. (2001): 
A mixture of ab ility and objectively assessed inter- 
ests and pe rsonality variables predict graduate stu- 
dent success with roughly equal (  .25  . 30) validi- 
ties that when combined form a multiple R of about 
.4. More im portantly and c onsistent w ith the O SS 
findings, complex assessments based upon the inter- 
actions of a ssessors with applicants have no incre- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
       
 
S1  S2 S3  S4 S5  S6 S7  S8 S9 
 
Ability by Stanine 
 
 
Figure 2. Su ccess rate in the Army Ai rforce elem entary 
pilot classes as a function of the ability scored in stanines. 
Cohorts 43 H-K. Fi gure adapted from tables in ( Dubuis, 
1947, p 119). Wh ile only about 20% of candidates w ith 
the lowest stanine su cceeded, almost 95% of the top sta- 
nines did. Sample si zes in each cohort range from 9,617 
to 11,010. 
 
 
 
 
mental validity. T hat is, pe ople who are more able, 
interested in psyc hology, and l ack nerv ous tensi on 
a
nd i rritability are more likely to su cceed in c lini- 
cal traini ng than the less able, less interested, a nd 
more nerv ous. Having l ong inter actions w ith an 
assessment board does not add informa tion to this 
combination of Ability, Interests, and Temperament 
(AIT). 
 
Theories of individual differences 
 
The late 1940’s through the mid 1960’s were 
a major time for theorizi ng a bout indivi dual dif- 
ferences. In terms of theories of inte llect, Joy P. 
Figure 2. Success rate in the Army Airforce elementary pilot classes as a function of the ability 
scored in stanines. Cohorts 43 H-K. Figure adapted from tables in (Dubuis, 1947, p 119). 
While only about 20% of candidates with the lowest stanine succeeded, almost 95% of the top 
stanines did. Sample sizes in each cohort range from 9,617 to 11,010.
Theories of individual differences
The late 1940’s through the mid 1960’s were a major time for theorizing about 
individual differences. In terms of theories of intellect, Joy P. Guilford’s attempt to 
cross three modes of thinking: operations, products, and content led to an ambitious 
attempt to measure 120 narrow factors of mental ability (Guilford, 1956, 1959). Each 
mode of thought had subcomponents such that operations could be divided into 
five: cognitive, memory, divergent thinking, convergent thinking and evaluation 
(Guilford, 1956), products could be divided into six: units, classes, relations, systems, 
transformations, and implications, and contents could be split into four: figural, 
symbolic, semantic, and behavioral.
An alternative model, suggesting a hierarchy of abilities was the fluid, crystallized, g 
model of ability (the g f − gc model) (Horn & Cattell, 1966) which made a distinction 
between processing factors (fluid) and knowledge factors (crystallized).
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
101
OVERVIEW OF DIFFERENTIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Raymond Cattell integrated cognitive and noncognitive personality variables 
when he laid out an ambitious plan to apply factor analytic methods from ability 
to the personality domain and commenced a long series of studies on the structure 
of personality (Cattell, 1943, 1946a,c,b, 1957, 1966b, 1978). To Cattell (1946c), 
surface traits were clusters of observations such as self reports of anxiety, crying 
or depression that needed be explained by source traits which could be derived 
from factor analysis. He elaborated the source trait distinction in terms of those 
that reflect ability, those that are dynamic, and those that are stable temperaments 
(Cattell, 1946b). Cattell (1946c) introduced the data box which emphasized that 
correlations can be taken over people, tests, or occasions. Although most research 
at the time emphasized the correlations of tests across people (R analyis), Cattell 
proposed to consider how people varied over tests (Q analysis) and how tests varied 
across time (P analysis), etc. Subsequently, Cattell (1966a) elaborated the data box 
into a five dimensional analysis by adding observers and background conditions. In a 
series of studies using peer ratings of personality as well as self reports Cattell (1957) 
emphasized many correlated factors of personality in what would eventually become 
his 16PF inventory. Reflecting his belief in the power of differential psychology 
and the need to integrate it with experimental psychology, Cattell was a founding 
member and first president of the Society for Multivariate Experimental Psychology 
in 1960.
The other grand theorist of individual differences was Hans Eysenck. He searched 
for consistency of individual differences starting using behavioral measures (H. J. 
Eysenck & Himmelweit, 1947) and then attempted to explain individual differences 
by using learning theory (H. J. Eysenck, 1952), and then subsequently arousal theory 
(H. J. Eysenck, 1967). By blending experimental and correlational data with the 
best available theory, he inspired others to study the hard question of mechanism. 
Never one to avoid controversy, his popular books (H. J. Eysenck, 1953, 1964, 1965) 
introduced the possibility of doing rigorous research in personality and individual 
differences to several generations of psychologists. Eysenck was a founder and first 
president of the International Society for the Study of Individual Differences in 1983. 
His contributions to the field field are discussed elsewhere in this handbook and do 
not need to be reviewed here.
Unlike later theorists, both Cattell and Eysenck emphasized individual differences 
broadly conceived. They both made contributions to the study of ability, to 
personality trait structure, and to psychometric methods. They attempted to 
integrate genetic, physiological, emotional, cognitive, and societal influences on 
human behavior. They both wrote prodigiously, with popular trade books as well  
as serious monographs and articles.
Less known to most differential psychologists were the contributions of John W. 
Atkinson who emphasized the interactive contribution of situational challenges 
and individual differences in achievement motivation. From a formal theory of 
risk preference (Atkinson, 1957) to a review of the effects of situational stressors on 
performance (Atkinson & Raynor, 1974) to a dynamic model of motivation (Atkinson 
& Birch, 1970), the theory of achievement motivation integrated approach and 
avoidance motivational tendencies. The study of achievement motivation has now 
been reinvigorated with the recent studies of Elliot & Church (1997) and Elliot & 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
102
REVELLE, CONDON, WILT
Thrash (2002) who fit achievement motivation and anxiety into an approach and 
avoidance temperament system similar to that of Carver & White (1994); Gray 
(1970). Taking the expectancy-value framework even further forward is the work of 
Eccles & Wigfield (2002) who integrates achievement motivation with theories of 
goal setting and interest motivation.
Perhaps unfortunately, this period was also represented by an explosion of 
personality inventories. These were developed by many different research groups. 
Inventories were constructed using empirical (Dahlstrom, 1992; Hathaway & 
McKinley, 1951, MMPI), rational (Gough, 1957, CPI), (Heist & Williams, 1957; 
Warren & Heist, 1960, OPI), and factorial, (H. J. Eysenck & Eysenck, 1964, EPI), 
(Cattell & Stice, 1957, 16PF), (Comrey, 1995, CPS), (Guilford & Zimmerman, 1949, 
GZTZ), (Hogan & Hogan, 1995, HPI) methodologies some without any organizing 
theory more than alphabetical (London & Exner, 1978).
Less noticed at the time, but more recently seen as bearing some very rich fruit were 
a series of longitudinal studies started in the late 1920s through 1950s, e.g., Block 
(1971), Elder (1998), Kelly (1955), and Schaie (2005). As is true of many longitudinal 
studies, these were not for the faint of heart, nor for the non-sophisticated 
methodologist. The Oakland Growth Study and subsequent Berkeley Guidance and 
Berkeley Growth study have been the source of data for developmentally oriented 
differential psychologists for more than 70 years (Block, 1971; Elder, 1998). The 
Schaie (2005) studies, for example involved multiple cohorts sampled every 5-7 
years for what is now more than 50 years. The early findings from these studies has 
matched the later results: ability, interests, and temperament are very stable over 
decades. Although there is some change, and character is not locked in cement, it is 
much more stable than had been thought (Roberts & DelVecchio, 2000).
Late 20th Century
Unfortunately, in the mid 1960’s, after the proven successes of differential psychologist 
predicting important criteria, there was a turn away from the study of individual 
differences, particularly in the United States. Personality trait theory came under 
attack as a study of small, non-replicable effects with no agreement about the 
proper structural representation of personality. The research emphasis in American 
psychology switched to situational explanations of behavior. Studies of ability were 
attacked as being elitist, racist, or exclusionary. Personality researchers no longer 
routinely included ability measures in their studies and were not trained in the 
measurement of ability. Studies of occupational interests and job performance were 
seen as applied problems not of interest to the pages of the top journals. Exceptions 
to this generalization were of course the superb integrative text by H. J. Eysenck 
& Eysenck (1985) and a text on individual differences by Willerman (1979). The 
research emphasis became one of ‘personality x situation interactions’ which had, of 
course, been well studied by Atkinson (1957); Cattell (1957) and H. J. Eysenck (1967) 
for many years.
Consensual descriptive taxonomies of personality
Eventually, after what some of us in the United States refer to as the ‘dark ages’ 
(1968–1990), personality and differential psychology became an active area of 
research again. This was partly because the European emphasis upon biological 
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
103
OVERVIEW OF DIFFERENTIAL PSYCHOLOGY
bases of personality (e.g., H. J. Eysenck (1967); Strelau & Eysenck (1987)) answered 
the situational attack, partly because the growing evidence for genetic bases of 
most individual differences (Bouchard, 1994; Plomin et al., 1994) and partly because 
of growing consensus about the descriptive dimensions of personality. For in the 
intervening years, there had been consistent evidence that a limited number of 
personality traits could be consistently identified in peer ratings and self reports 
(Fiske, 1949; Norman, 1963, 1969; Tupes & Christal, 1961) and that most self report 
inventories included some but not necessarily all of these so-called ‘Big 5’ dimensions. 
(Digman, 1990; Goldberg, 1990). Two of these dimensions (extraversion and 
neuroticism) clearly matched the biologically based taxonomies of H. J. Eysenck 
(1967), two (agreeableness and conscientiousness) seemed to represent a splitting 
of what H. J. Eysenck (1990) had labeled psychoticism or tough mindedness, and 
an additional dimension of intellectual interests and openness to new experiences 
blended ability with approach motivation. Following a number of influential meta 
analyses showing that personality and ability variables did indeed have predictive 
validity in occupational settings (Barrick & Mount, 1991; Mount et al., 2005) and that 
characteristics of bad leadership that were a threat to organizational effectiveness 
could be identified by self report (Hogan, 1994; Hogan et al., 1990), individual 
differences research became respectable again. 
Subsequent work discussing blends of the Big 5 (Hofstee et al., 1992a; J. A. Johnson 
& Ostendorf, 1993) continued the atheoretic tradition of the descriptive taxonomies, 
but did show how three biological dimensions (the ‘Giant 3’) could be related to five 
descriptive dimensions. The development of a standard instrument (the Neuroticism- 
Extraversion-Openness Personality Inventory, Revised or NEO-PI, Costa & McCrae 
(1985)) to measure the ‘Big 5’ trait dimensions certainly helped as did the forceful 
reviews by Costa & McCrae (1992a), (McCrae & Costa, 1997) and McCrae & Costa (1999).
Consensual structure of intelligence
On the abilities front, the review by Carroll (1993) of more than 70 years of 
intelligence testing integrated most of the prior studies such as the g f − gc model 
of Horn & Cattell (1966) or a hierarchical model of g with second order factors of 
verbal and educational (v:ed versus spatial, practical and numerical (k:m (Vernon, 
1965) into a the three stratum model of g Deary et al. (2010) which, in some versions 
g − g f − gc is known as the Carroll-Horn Cattell (GHC) model (McGrew, 2009). 
An alternative three level model (VPR) pitted the v:ed and k:m model against the g 
f − gc and suggests the importance of Verbal, Perceptual/memory and Rotational 
abilities W. Johnson & Bouchard Jr. (2005) as second level strata in a three level 
model. (Pre- sentations with few tests tend to discuss three level models, where the 
lowest level is a test, but as the number of tests increases the lowest level becomes the 
factor representing these tests). An important concept in relating cognitive variables 
to criteria is the correct level of analysis (Wittmann, 1991) which helps provide an 
agreed upon structure to the studies of ability.
2000–2010
Revival of interest
The last fewyears have seen a revival of interest in individual differences. Not only 
this handbook, but also the texts by Cooper (1997), Chamorro- Premuzic (2007), and 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
104
REVELLE, CONDON, WILT
M. W. Eysenck (1994), well as handbooks on methods (Robins et al., 2007),  
in- dividual differences in social (Leary & Hoyle, 2009) or cognitive (Gruzka 
et al., 2010) correlates and edited volumes on biological bases (Canli, 2006) and 
Reinforcement Sensivity theory (Corr, 2008).
The journal Personality and Individual Differences has seen its page count expand 
dramatically as the output of differential psychologists continues to grow. In 
organizational psychology, meta analyses showing the importance of cognitive 
(Kuncel et al., 2001, 2007) and non-cognitive predictors (Barrick & Mount, 1991; 
Mount et al., 2005) for real world outcomes that include occupational attainment, 
marital stability and early mortality (Roberts et al., 2007).
Individual Differences theories applied to psychopathology
Clinical psychology has always been concerned with individual differences, and was 
the motivation behind developing such tests as the MMPI (Hathaway & McKinley, 
1943) and later, the Schedule for Non Adapative and Adaptive Personalilty (SNAP, 
Clark, 1993) but until recently that has been surprisingly little interchange between 
the personality and abilities communities with those who study psychopathology. 
It would seem that the emphasis on Neuroticism and trait anxiety of many trait 
theorists would have had direct applications in theories of psychopathology, but the 
emphasis upon diagnostic categories rather than continuous traits has led to a lack of 
interaction. Exceptions to this general rule include work relating personality traits to 
Axis I disorders (Trull & Sher, 1994; Krueger et al., 1996), the work on positive and 
negative affectivity in models of depression and anxiety (Clark et al., 1994; Watson 
et al., 2005) as well as applications of the Five Factor Model to predict personality 
disorders (Bagby et al., 2005; Costa & Widiger, 2002; Widiger & Costa, 1994). The 
taxonomic work of Krueger (2002); Krueger & Markon (2006), Markon et al. (2005) 
and Tackett et al. (2008) integrating the dimensions of normal personality with a 
dimensional rather than categorical organization of psychopathology (Watson, 2005) 
should lead to better theory development in both of these aspects of differential 
psychology.
Biological models
Reinforcement Sensitivity Theory. The rat inspired Reinforcement Sensitivity 
Theory (Gray, 1981, 1982; Gray & McNaughton, 2000) was developed primarily 
as a theory of anxiety but has had an enormous impact upon biologically inspired 
personality theorists in general (Corr, 2002, 2008). As Smillie et al. (in press) discuss, 
RST was developed from the bottom up (from the physiology of the rat up to the 
behavior of the human) rather than the conventional top down description and 
theorizing of most personality research. To some, RST is a projective test (Revelle, 
2008) in that how it is interpreted depends a great deal upon the investigator. This 
is perhaps why there is an ongoing debate about the range of the RST (Smillie et al., 
2006; Smillie, 2008, in press, and the discussions following). It seems clear that for at 
least the next decade it will be an active research endeavor.
Other biological models. Contemporary biological models have benefitted from 
technological advances in assessing neurophysiology. MRI studies have investigated 
structural correlates of individual differences (Omura et al., 2005; Rauch et al., 2005) 
from the perspective of learning theory. Depue (1995) his colleagues (Depue & 
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
105
OVERVIEW OF DIFFERENTIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Collins, 1999) claim that individual differences in the strength of a neurobehavioral 
system tied to dopaminergic functioning is the causal basis for extraversion. Although 
research on this theory is still in its nascent stages, EEG studies generally supporting 
the dopaminergic hypothesis (Wacker et al., 2006). Perhaps the most important 
methodological advance has been the use of fMRI to study how patterns of brain 
activation relate to individual differences. In particular, Herrington et al. (2006) 
reviewed evidence suggesting that left hemisphere lateralization is associated with 
approach temperament. There is mixed evidence that approach temperament, 
consisting of extraversion, positive affect, and behavioral approach (Elliot & Thrash, 
2002), predicts high performance on a variety of neuropsychological tasks that 
require cognitive functions that are specialized to the left prefrontal lobe. fMRI 
has also been used to study how individual differences correlate with specific 
brain regions (Canli, 2004; Canli et al., 2001). New technologies offer exciting 
opportunities for uncovering the biolgoical bases of individual differences; however, 
there is also an increased likelihood that data generated by novel approaches may 
be analyzed inappropriately (Vul et al., 2009). As research in this domain moves 
forward, it will be important to balance enthuisasm with careful analysis and 
interpretation.
 
An important biologically based variable that affects social behavior, affect, and 
cognition is the diurnal arousal rhythm of animals as diverse as humans, hamsters, 
and fruit flies. Not only do people vary in their arousal over the day, but the time 
of peak arousal varies systematically between individuals. Diurnal rhythms and 
individual differences in phase have been used for testing theories of personality. 
The interactive effect on cognitive performance of impulsivity, caffeine, and time of 
day (Revelle et al., 1980) was used to argue against the arousal theory of extraversion 
(H. J. Eysenck, 1967). Individual differences in diurnal rhythms as assessed by core 
body temperature were correlated with various measures morningness-eveningness 
as well as voluntary sleep and awakening times (Baehr et al., 2000). The minimum 
body temperature of self described morning types was roughly two hours ahead 
of that for self described evening types, although the behavioral response to social 
cues led to a smaller difference in voluntary sleeping and rising times between the 
two groups. The combination of body temperature rhythm and sleep and waking 
times suggests why evening people are more alert than morning types before going 
to sleep, and why the evening types are so sluggish after awakening. Individual 
differences in diurnal rhythms are particularly important for sleep researchers 
(Taillard et al., 2003), especially those interested in sleep problems associated with 
adolescents versus adults (Crowley et al., 2007). The combination of social cues with 
an endogenous clock rhythm has important implications in other species as well: for 
instance, in the fruit fly where mating habits of different species depend upon their 
arousal cycle (Rosato & Kyriacou, 2008).
Genetics
Perhaps one of the clearest findings in differential psychology in the past 30 years is 
that almost all differences are under moderate to strong genetic control (Bouchard, 
1994, 2004; Bouchard & Loehlin, 2001; McGue & Bouchard, 1998; Pedersen et al., 
1988; Spinath & Johnson, in press, this volume). Equally strong, and much more 
surprising, is that when doing an ACE analysis (analyzing for additive, common 
environmental, and unique environmental effects), there is generally little to no 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
106
REVELLE, CONDON, WILT
evidence for shared family environments. These effects are not just for the standard 
measures of ability or the ‘Big 5’ dimensions of personality. They are true for various 
psychopathologies, for interests, for sexual orientation, and even for religiousity. 
Indeed, it is now noteworthy when an differential trait does not show a substantial 
genetic component.
That something is heritable does not imply a simple genetic architecture. Heritability 
is just a ratio of variance that can be associated with genetic causes to the total 
observed variance. Genetic effects can interact with (Caspi et al., 2002) and/or 
correlate with environmental variation in complex manners (W. Johnson, in press). 
One of the major disappointments of the switch from quantitative behavioral genetics 
to the molecular genetics and the search for particular genes is how few genes have 
been shown to have replicable effects, and even of those, how small the effects are. 
The simple One Gene-One Disease (OGOD) hypothesis (Plomin et al., 1994) derived 
from medical genetics, or its somewhat more complicated alternative of One Gene- 
One System Hypothesis (OGOSH) does not seem to be supported. Even for clearly 
genetic traits such as height (with a heritability greater than .8), it is hard to find any 
single gene that is strongly associated with height. Basic concepts to remember when 
reading the behavior genetic literature are that
1. Additive heritability is a hodgepodge ratio of genetic variance to  
 total variance.
2. The less the environmental variance, the greater the heritability.
3. Heritability within groups does not imply between genetics causes  
 of between group differences.
Between group versus within group differences. A recurring problem in inference 
about genetics is whether genetic variability within groups has anything to do with 
genetic differences between groups. Consider the example of height (W. Johnson, in 
press). It is well established that he heritability of height is roughly .8 within cultures. 
That is, that about 80% of the variability in height is associated with genes. But it is 
equally well established that height changes in response to nutrition. Two groups 
that are genetically equivalent (North and South Koreans) differ by about 6 inches in 
height. How can this be? The answer is that heritability estimates, based upon within 
group environmental variance, do not consider environmental variability between 
groups nor do they say anything about how the trait will respond to environmental 
changes that do notvary within the group.
Related to this is the so-called “Spearman Hypothesis” that if factor loadings on a 
variable are correlated with heritability and also correlated with between group 
differences, then the between group differences must be genetic. A simple thought 
experiment shows why this is not true. Consider variables measuring overall height. 
Of these, some will be better measures of height than others, perhaps because of 
reliability issues, perhaps because the others are less valid. In this case, the factor 
loadings on the general factor of height will be correlated with their heritability 
values. In addition those measure that are the better measure of height will show the 
biggest between group difference on height. Indeed, the factor loadings, heritabilities 
and between group differences will be highly correlated, even though the between 
group difference is due to nutrition.
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
107
OVERVIEW OF DIFFERENTIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Sex differences
Are men and women different? Yes. But how and why continues to be an important 
question for differential psychologists. Schmitt et al. (2008) examined sex differences 
on a short form of the Big 5 (BFI Benet-Mart´ınez & John, 1998) across 55 different 
countries. The mean z score sex differences showed that women are more neurotic 
(z¯=.40), agreeable (z¯ =.15), conscientious (z¯ =.12), extraverted(z¯ =.10) and less 
open (z¯ =-.05). Schmitt et al. (2008) found that sex differences vary across cultures 
as a function of equality. That is, higher levels of health, access to education and well 
being were related to greater sex differences. These results differ somewhat from 
an international (but English speaking) web based self selected sample of more than 
50,000 participants who took a Big 5 inventory and reported their SAT Verbal and 
SAT Quantitative scores (Revelle et al., 2010), women were more agreeable (d = .56), 
less emotionally stable (d = -.54), less open (d = -.30), more conscientious (d=.24) and 
more extraverted (d=.14). Men and women reported practically identical SAT Verbal 
scores, but lower SAT Quantitative scores (d=.29). Gender differences have been 
reported for the facets of the NEO, and to be greater in Europe and America than 
other cultures (Costa et al., 2001).
Although the stereotype is that women talk more than men, an observational study 
which sampled talking behavior for 30 seconds every 12.5 minutes for several days 
did not find a reliable difference in talking behavior between men and women (Mehl 
et al., 2007).
Even among amazingly talented women and men, there are reliable sex differences 
in interests and values (Ferriman et al., 2009). More importantly, these differences 
grow through their career. Men were more career focused and willing to take 
greater risks in order to receive greater recognition. Women, on the other hand, 
emphasized community, family and friendships. It seemed as if the men were 
emphasizing goals that differentiated them from others (inter-individual), while the 
women were emphasizing family and friends.
Although men and women do not differ in overall ability, the importance of mean 
differences in the lower order factors of ability tests are masked when looking at 
overall g scores. Women out perform men on verbal and perceptual speed tasks but 
do less well on visuospatial problems (W. Johnson & Bouchard Jr., 2007). These sex 
differences, although strong, partly depend upon method of analysis (Steinmayr et 
al., 2010). Sex differences in the variance of ability although small, occur early in life 
(Arden & Plomin, 2006) and have important implications for the frequency of men 
and women with extreme scores.
Integrating abilities, values, and interests
Individuals differ not only in their abilities and temperaments. They also differ 
in their values (Feather, 1995; Rohan, 2000) and interests (Holland, 1959, 1996). 
Unfortunately, although there are exceptions (Ackerman, 1997; Ackerman & 
Heggestad, 1997; Ferriman et al., 2009; Lubinski & Benbow, 2000), there have 
been few attempts to integrate the research in interests with research in ability or 
temperament. Promising attempts are being done as part of the longitudinal study 
of mathematically precocious youth (Lubinski & Benbow, 2000, 2006). Ackerman & 
Heggestad (1997) have proposed ‘trait complexes’ of mixes of abilities and interests 
and suggest that
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
108
REVELLE, CONDON, WILT
abilities, interests, and personality develop in tandem, such that ability 
level and personality dispositions determine the probability of success in a 
particular task domain, and interests determine the motivation to attempt the 
task. Thus, subsequent to successful attempts at task performance, interest 
in the task domain may increase. Conversely, unsuccessful attempts at task 
performance may result in a decrement in interest for that domain. (Ackerman 
& Heggestad, 1997, p 239)
The theory of Work Adjustment (Lofquist & Dawis, 1969) as modified by Lubinski 
& Benbow (2000) is an excellent example of how to blend individual differences in 
abilities, interests, and values into a long term theory of job satisfaction. Applications 
of this model to the long term career choices of especially talented men and women 
(Ferriman et al., 2009) show the power of the model. This work, although very 
important, has not yet be integrated into a general theory of individual differences.
Applications
It is important to recognize that differential psychology is not just an academic 
exercise in measurement and theory building. The use of ability, psychomoter and 
personality inventories in predicting real world criteria is an important application of 
our work. Reminiscent of the personality characteristics discussed in The Republic, 
Musson et al. (2004) wheb predicting aviator or astronaut success found that
Superior performance has consistently been linked to a personality profile 
characterized by a combination of high levels of instrumentality and expressiv- 
ity along with lower levels of interpersonal aggressiveness. This personality 
profile has sometimes been referred to as the “Right Stuff,” suggesting that this 
is the ideal description for an effective astronaut or pilot. Inferior performance 
has been linked to personality profiles typified by a hostile and competitive 
interpersonal orientation (the “Wrong Stuff,” suggesting that these individuals 
may not have the best characteristics for teamwork in complex settings) or to 
low achievement motivation combined with passive-aggressive characteristics 
(the “No Stuff ” cluster, referring to individuals who score uniformly low on 
key traits). (Musson et al., 2004, p. 342)
For predicting success in graduate school, a combination of ability and 
conscientiousness predicts success across programs (Kuncel et al., 2001). Long 
term follow up studies of especially talented 12 year olds have shown the power of 
ability as well as interests in predicting careers in the STEM (Science, Technology, 
Engineering, and Mathematics) fields (Ferriman et al., 2009; Lubinski & Benbow, 
2000, 2006). It is not just raw talent that is important in terms of who succeeds in a 
STEM career, but the relative mix of verbal, spatial, and quantitative abilities, as well 
as interests in family and friends (Ferriman et al., 2009).
Personality, Ability and Values across nations
People as well as nations differ in wealth, education, mental health, nutrition and 
values (Bardi & Schwartz, 2003; Schwartz & Bilsky, 1987). Attempts at integrating 
between nation and within nation individual differences are fraught with method- 
ological complications (Hunt & Wittmann, 2008) but also suggest interesting 
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
109
OVERVIEW OF DIFFERENTIAL PSYCHOLOGY
hypotheses about the effects of culture upon behavior (Chiao & Blizinsky,
2009). There is some work attempting to integrate values with abilities and 
temperament, both within and between nations (Stankov, 2009).
Current Status and Future directions
It is clear that differential psychology has a storied and illustrious past. It is also 
apparent from the number and diversity of areas reviewed that differential 
psychology currently has a firm foothold in the field of psychology and has made 
broad contributions to science more generally. As with any science, however, the task 
of theorists and researchers is not to relive the glory years or dwell on misguided 
ventures (i.e., the “Dark Ages”). Rather, the task is to continue to make progress and 
push the boundaries of knowledge by attempting to answer difficult and important 
questions. Differential psychology is facing such questions on all fronts and across 
many levels of analysis. Questions at the forefront of contemporary differential 
psychology range from how basic genetic and neurobiological characteristics 
contribute to individual differences (Canli, 2006) to questions about how high-level 
social and cultural systems interact to influence individual differences (Van de Vijver 
& Leung, 2008).
Differential psychology, at its heart, seeks to understand variation in how people feel, 
act, and think and want (Allport, 1937; Emmons, 1989; J. A. Johnson, 1997; Winter 
et al., 1998). As such, researchers studying differential psychology tend to consider 
questions in one of four domains of effective functioning: affect, behavior, cognition, 
and motivation (desire) – the “ABCDs of Personality” (Revelle, 2008). Briefly, affect 
comprises feelings, emotions, and moods; behavior comprises motor actions such as 
walking and talking as well as physiological processes such as heart rate; cognition 
comprises thoughts and beliefs as well as how one makes meaning from the world 
and out of one’s life; desires comprise motivational tendencies, drives, and one’s 
short and long-term goals. Researchers typically focus on one ABCD domain of 
functioning to the neglect of considering connections across levels and domains.
In the domain of affect, there has been considerable debate about over how many 
and which dimensions best characterize affective space, with various competing 
models garnering empirical support. The circumplex model of affect (Barrett & Rus- 
sell, 1998; Russell, 1980) arranges affective space around the dimensions of Valence 
and Arousal. In this model, positive and negative emotions are considered bipolar 
opposites. In contrast, other two-dimensional models of affect propose that positive 
and negative affects reside on two independent unipolar dimensions (Cacioppo & 
Berntson, 1994; Thayer, 1989; Watson et al., 1988). A three-dimensionsal model has 
been proposed that incorporates a Valence dimension with two independent arousal 
dimensions, Energetic Arousal and Tense Arousal (Schimmack & Grob, 2000; 
Schimmack & Reisenzein, 2002). Not only do average levels of the aforementioned 
affective dimensions differ between people (Watson, 2000), but recent research has 
also shown that the structure of affective space itself may be considered an individual 
difference variable (Feldman, 1995; Rafaeli et al., 2007).
A longstanding goal of individual differences research is to predict behavior (Allport, 
1937; Fleeson, 2001; Pervin, 1994). Indeed, predicting on-going behavior in naturally 
occurring environments is extolled as a gold standard in individual differences 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
110
REVELLE, CONDON, WILT
research (Craik, 2000). With some notable exceptions including H. J. Eysenck & 
Himmelweit (1947)’s work on the factor structure of behavioral observations, this 
goal has too seldom been realized. It has historically been relatively difficult and 
expensive to collect large slices of naturally occurring behavior (Eaton & Funder, 
2003; Funder, 2001); however, recent advances in methods of data collecting behavior 
including electronic diaries (Green et al., 2006), portable recorders (Mehl
& Pennebaker, 2003), and cell-phone methods of data collection (Collins et al., 2003; 
Reid et al., 2008) have made it easier to obtain data on behavior as it occurs. Such 
advances combined with instruments tailored to assess behavior (Funder et al.,
2000) have resulted in a growth of studies looking at how Big-Five trait dispositions 
are reflected in behavior across time (Fleeson & Gallagher, 2009; Mehl et al., 2006; 
Paunonen, 2003).
The research on intelligence constitutes the most influential and well-established 
study of any cognitive individual difference variable. Real world criteria range from 
job performance to mortality (Deary et al., 2004, 2010). Researchers have begun 
studying how personality dispositions relate to cognitive differences, with most of 
this research focusing on the trait of openness/intellect (Costa & McCrae, 1992b; 
Hofstee et al., 1992b). Individuals higher in openness generally score higher on 
measures of cognitive ability (DeYoung et al., 2005; Revelle et al., 2010), are seen 
as displaying more creative thinking and have a greater capacity for divergent 
thinking (McCrae, 1987). Developing in parallel to research on trait dispositions 
is the social- cognitive approach to personality (Bandura & Press, 1999; Dweck & 
Leggett, 1988). Researchers in the social-cognitive tradition emphasize variations 
in cognitive tasks, strategies, and schemas. Some of the most well-know research 
from this approach has examined differences between people who perceive ability 
as stable, labeled entity theorists, and those who see ability as malleable, labeled as 
incremental theorists (Hong et al., 1999). Cognition also includes the life-narrative 
approach to individual differences (McAdams, 2008), which focuses on variations 
in how people integrate their remembered past, experienced present, and imagined 
future into a coherent life story.
 
Research on individual differences in motivation or desire has made some 
impressive findings in recent years. A hierarchical model of independent approach 
and avoidance motivation dimensions has been specified (Elliot & Church, 1997), 
elaborated (Elliot & McGregor, 2001), and correlated with individual differences in 
academic performance (Cury et al., 2006). Higgins (1998)’s Regulatory Focus Theory 
(RFT), which posits that people are guided by two distinct motivational systems: 
promotion focus and prevention focus, has gained solid footing in the literature on 
motivation. Promotion focus is manifested in attempts to bring one’s actual self into 
alignment with one’s ideal selves reflecting one’s wishes and aspirations. Prevention 
focus leads one to bring one’s actual selves into alignment with one’s ought selves or 
the standards reflecting duties and obligations. Research on broad life goals, which 
had long been neglected, has recently picked up in the context of relating goals to Big 
5 variables (Roberts & Robins, 2000; Roberts et al., 2004). In addition to nomothetic 
approaches to motivations and goals, idiographic assessments of what people strive 
for in their lives (Emmons, 1986) as well as their personal projects (Little et al., 1992) 
have also gained popularity.
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
111
OVERVIEW OF DIFFERENTIAL PSYCHOLOGY
The fact that domains of functioning are studied in isolation from each other level is 
not a criticism of those researchers for indeed each level and domain deserves careful 
attention. However, failure to pursue integration may leave gaps or holes (Rozin, 2007) 
in theories of individual differences. Therefore, the state of research on individual 
differences is in need of frameworks in which integration across levels may be achieved. 
The question of integration boils down to a question of organization. That is, how can 
theories of individual differences be organized such that the domains of functioning 
(ABCDs) may be connected in meaningful ways to each other?
We believe that such an integration may be forged by adopting an information 
processing perspective. Specifically, individual differences in the coherent patterning 
of affect, behavior, cognition, and desire may be understood at three levels of 
information processing - reactive, routine, and reflective (Ortony et al., 2005). It is 
important to note that the reactive, routine, and reflective levels are not separated by 
sharp boundaries but lie on a continuum of complexity ranging from more basic and
immediate processes (reactive) to well-learned and rehearsed processes (routine) to 
complex and abstract processes (reflective).
The reactive level of information processing comprises rapid and efficient responses 
to stimuli. Responses at this level consist of a unified combination of affective 
and behavioral and motivational processes. For example, after touching a stove 
burner, the motivation to avoid pain, (Desire), fear (Affect), and removal of 
one’s hand (Behavior) likely occur simultaneously and do not require elaborated 
cognition. The routine level comprises well-learned, everyday activities. At this 
level, affect, behavior, and motivation may be distinguished from each other 
due to the emergence of low-level cognitive processes. At the routine level of 
processing, an individual noticing his or her hand approaching a hot stove would 
be able to cognitively discriminate between the present state of not being in pain 
and fear (Affect) an uwanted future state of pain (Desire). The individual may thus 
act (Behavior) to increase the likelihood that pain does not ensue. The reflective 
level describes higher-level cognitive functioning such as self-awareness and 
metaprocessing. At this level affect becomes enriched with cognitive content such 
that conscious plans may guide behavior toward or away from well-elaborated and 
nuanced goals. One may safeguard the stove so that young children are unlikely to 
come into contact with the burners.
The above examples lead to the realization that the ABCDs constantly interact 
in dynamic ways across multiple levels of information processing. As such, those 
dynamic interactions should be a focal point of differential psychology theories 
and failure to consider such dynamics may limit the generation of comprehensive 
theories of individual differences. By adopting an information-processing approach, 
the study of differential psychology becomes the study of the coherent patterning 
of ABCDs across time and space (Wilt & Revelle, 2009). The task of differential 
psychology thus becomes the task of explaining why people have different ABCD 
patterns across the different levels of information processing and determining how 
those differences relate to important outcomes.
The ABCD approach has the potential to serve as an overarching conceptual 
framework for individual differences research. It is important for future research 
not only to integrate across levels of analysis and domains of functioning but also to 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
112
REVELLE, CONDON, WILT
resolve some of the specific and pressing issues facing differential psychology today. 
As would be expected of such a broad and fast-expanding field, questions facing dif- 
ferential psychology involve tackling the influence of variables from genes to virtual 
environments, and many questions revolve around the use of new technologies.
Although it is too early to render judgment on the usefulness of genome wide 
association studies (GWAS), the high cost and limited benefits of current GWAS of 
disease (Kraft & Hunter, 2009) raise the question of whether individual differences 
research would benefit from employing such methods. Some great discoveries have 
been made (Amos, 2007), but the infrequency with which these findings occur 
suggests that the traditional GWAS method of exploring common gene variants is in 
need of some rethinking before it is adopted by differential psychology. Remaining 
in the realm of biology, serious thought should also be given to the use and 
interpretation of fMRI data given the recent debate about whether current findings 
using fMRI inflate relationships between brain and personality processes (Vul et al., 
2009).
Developmental research on individual differences must go beyond studying genes 
and neurophysiological processes in isolation to focus on interactions between 
biological and environmental variables using longitudinal studies. When such 
interactions are found they generate a tremendous amount of excitement (Caspi 
et al., 2003); however, interactions are difficult to replicate (Os & Rutten, 2009), 
calling into question their validity. Further attention may be warranted due to the 
importance of interactions in establishing boundary conditions for theories of the 
etiology of disorders as well as for identifying particular populations that might be at 
most risk for developing disorders.
Longitudinal studies have been instrumental in showing how differences in the 
Big-Five traits relate to myriad important outcomes such as mental health, mental 
disorders, job success, marriage satisfaction, and even mortality (Ozer & Benet- 
Martinez, 2006; Roberts et al., 2007). Indeed, trait psychology has been one of 
the most successful enterprises of personality for predicting and understanding 
healthy psychological functioning. Future research should focus on the mechanisms 
through which traits achieve their effects. Finding mechanistic relationships may 
be instrumental in developing effective interventions. Research predicting practical 
outcomes from traits should be balanced with basic research aimed at uncovering 
the etiology of individual difference dimensions. Non-intuitive but exciting ways 
to study basic individual differences in humans that do not rely even human beings 
may be explored by studying animal personality (Vazire & Gosling, 2003; Vazire et 
al., 2007). There has been a long history of studying biological mechanisms thought 
to relate to personality using animal models in drug or lesion studies (Gray, 1982; 
Gray & McNaughton, 2000) as well as selective breeding studies (Broadhurst, 
1975). But now, observational studies of non-human animals may allow individual 
differences researchers opportunities to examine questions that are difficult or 
impossible to explore in humans.
The already vast database on individual differences is sure to continue grow at 
an increasingly fast rate given the ease of public domain personality assessment, 
specifically using resources suc as the IPIP (Goldberg, 1999; Goldberg et al., 2006). 
The possibility for such data to be stored in large databases available for public use 
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
113
OVERVIEW OF DIFFERENTIAL PSYCHOLOGY
heeds the call to make differential psychology accessible to everyone. Additionally, 
the ability to make inferences about individual differences based on the content 
of personal websites (Gosling et al., 2004) should only augment the richness of 
individual differences data that are readily available.
Conclusion
In what ways do people differ from each other? Why do people differ from each 
other? To study individual differences is to ask these fundamental questions. 
Although the scope and importance of these questions is almost impossible to 
overestimate, the field of differential psychology must not be content to tackle 
description and theory-building alone. In order for the field to realize its potential, 
it must also be concerned with using individual differences to predict important 
outcomes. What characteristics make someone a successful graduate student, 
military officer, or business executive? Generating knowledge about how and 
why people differ and applying that knowledge to potentially improve society 
are the daunting tasks charged to our field, but we are well-prepared. Differential 
psychologists are making advances in understanding characteristic patterns of 
affect, behavior, cognition, and motivation; these patterns may be conceptualized 
as individual differences in abilities, interests, and temperament. There may be 
relatively weak correlations across AIT domains, but it is important that differential 
psychologist not get discouraged over these results. Indeed, loose associations 
among these constructs are encouraging because that means that variables from 
each domain may serve as important predictors in their own right. Thus, abilities, 
interests, and temperaments may have additive and interactive relationships to 
practically important outcomes. The focus of the field may thus benefit from shifting 
its focus from correlational structure to prediction. By doing so, we may achieve 
another high point similar to that we realized in the mid-20th century. Indeed, the 
future of differential psychology is more promising than it has been for decades.
References
Ackerman, P. L. (1997). Personality, self-concept, interests, and intelligence: Which 
construct doesn’t fit? Journal of Personality, 65(2), 171-204.
Ackerman, P. L., & Heggestad, E. D. (1997). Intelligence, personality, and interests: 
Evidence for overlapping traits. Psychological Bulletin, 121(2), 219–245.
Allport, G. W. (1937). Personality; a psychological interpretation. New York,: H. Holt 
and Company.
Amos, C. I. (2007). Successful design and conduct of genome-wide association 
studies. Human Molecular Genetics, 16(R2), R220–R225.
Arden, R., & Plomin, R. (2006). Sex differences in variance of intelligence across 
childhood. Personality and Individual Differences, 41(1), 39–48.
Armstrong, P. I., Smith, T. J., Donnay, D. A., & Rounds, J. (2004). The Strong Ring: 
A Basic Interest Model of Occupational Structure. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 
51(3), 299–313.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
114
REVELLE, CONDON, WILT
Atkinson, J. W. (1957). Motivational determinants of risk-taking behavior. 
Psychological Review, 64, 359-372.
Atkinson, J. W., & Birch, D. (1970). The dynamics of action. New York, N.Y.: John 
Wiley.
Atkinson, J. W., & Raynor, J. O. (Eds.). (1974). Motivation and achievement. New 
York: Winston (Halsted Press/Wiley).
Baehr, E. K., Revelle, W., & Eastman, C. I. (2000). Individual differences in the phase 
and amplitude of the human circadian temperature rhythm: with an emphasis on 
morningness-eveningness. Journal of Sleep Research, 9(2), 117–127.
Bagby, R., Costa, Jr., P., Widiger, T. A., Ryder, A. G.,& Marshall, M. (2005). 
DSM-IV personality disorders and the five-factor model of personality: A multi-
method examination of domain – and facet-level predictions. European Journal of 
Personality, 19(4), 307–324.
Bandura, A., & Press, G. (1999). A social cognitive theory of personality. In L. A. 
Pervin & O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of personality, 2nd ed. (p. 154–196). New York: 
Guilford Press.
Bardi, A., & Schwartz, S. H. (2003). Values and Behavior: Strength and Structure of 
Relations. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29(10), 1207–1220.
 
Barrett, L., & Russell, J. A. (1998). Independence and bipolarity in the structure of 
current affect. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74(4), 967-984.
Barrick, M. R., & Mount, M. K. (1991). The big five personallity dimensions and job 
performance: a meta-analysis. Personnel Psychology, 44(1), 1–26.
Bartholomew, D., Deary, I., & Lawn, M. (2009). A new lease of life for Thomson’s 
bonds model of intelligence. Psychological review, 116(3), 567–579.
Benet-Mart´ınez, V., & John, O. P. (1998). Los Cinco Grandes across cultures and 
ethnic groups: Multitrait-multimethod analyses of the Big Five in Spanish and 
English. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75(3), 729–750.
Binet, A., & Simon, T. (1905). New methods for the diagnosis of the intellectual 
level of subnormals. L ’annee Psychologique, 12, 191–244 Binet, 1905 A. Binet, 
New methods for the diagnosis of the intellectual level of subnormals, L ’Annee 
Psychologique 12 (1905), pp. 191–244 (Translated in 1916 by E. S. Kite in The 
Development of Intelligence in Children. Vineland, NJ: Publications of the Training 
School at Vineland.).
Block, J. (1971). Lives through time. Berkeley: Bancroft Books.
Bock, R. D. (2007). Rethinking thurstone. In R. Cudeck & R. C. MacCallum (Eds.), 
Factor analysis at 100: Historical developments and future directions (p. 35–45). 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
115
OVERVIEW OF DIFFERENTIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Bouchard, T. J. (1994). Genes, environment, and personality. Science, 264(5166), 
1700–1701.
Bouchard, T. J. (2004). Genetic influence on human psychological traits: A survey. 
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 13(4), 148–151.
Bouchard, T. J., & Loehlin, J. C. (2001). Genes, evolution, and personality. Behavior 
Genetics, 31(3), 243–273.
Broadhurst, P. (1975, 10 29). The maudsley reactive and nonreactive strains of rats: A 
survey. Behavior Genetics, 5(4), 299–319.
Cacioppo, J. T., & Berntson, G. G. (1994). Relationship between attitudes and 
evaluative space: A critical review, with emphasis on the separability of positive and 
negative substrates. Psychological Bulletin, 115(3), 401–423.
  
Canli, T. (2004). Functional brain mapping of extraversion and neuroticism: learning 
from individual differences in emotion processing. Journal of Personality, 72(6), 
1105–1132.
Canli, T. (2006). Biology of personality and individual differences. xv, 462 pp. New 
York, NY: Guilford Press.
Canli, T., Zhao, Z., Desmond, J. E., Kang, E., Gross, J., & Gabrieli, J. D. (2001). 
An fmri study of personality influences on brain reactivity to emotional stimuli. 
Behavioral Neuroscience, 115(1), 33–42.
Carroll, J. B. (1993). Human cognitive abilities: A survey of factor-analytic studies. 
New York, NY, US: Cambridge University Press.
Carver, C. S., & White, T. L. (1994). Behavioral inhibition, behavioral activation, 
and affective responses to impending reward and punishment: The BIS/BAS scales. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 319–333.
Caspi, A., McClay, J., Moffitt, T., Mill, J., Martin, J., Craig, I. W., et al. (2002). Role of 
genotype in the cycle of violence in maltreated children. Science, 297(5582), 851–854.
Caspi, A., Sugden, K., Moffitt, T. E., Taylor, A., Craig, I. W., Harrington, H., et al. 
(2003). Influence of life stress on depression: Moderation by a polymorphism in the 
5-HTT gene. Science, 301(5631), 386–389.
Cattell, R. B. (1943). The description of personality. I. Foundations of trait 
measurement. Psychological Review, 50(6), 559–594.
Cattell, R. B. (1946a). Description and measurement of personality. Oxford, England: 
World Book Company.
Cattell, R. B. (1946b). Personality structure and measurement. II. The determination 
and utility of trait modality. British Journal of Psychology, 36, 159–174.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
116
REVELLE, CONDON, WILT
Cattell, R. B. (1946c). Personality structure and measurement. I. The operational 
determination of trait unities. British Journal of Psychology, 36, 88–102.
Cattell, R. B. (1957). Personality and motivation structure and measurement. Oxford, 
England: World Book Co.
Cattell, R. B. (1966a). The data box: Its ordering of total resources in terms of possible 
relational systems. In R. B. Cattell (Ed.), Handbook of multivariate experimental 
psychology (p. 67–128). Chicago: Rand-McNally.
 
Cattell, R. B. (1966b). The scientific analysis of personality. Chicago,: Aldine Pub. Co.
Cattell, R. B. (1978). The scientific use of factor analysis. New York: Plenum Press.
Cattell, R. B., & Stice, G. (1957). Handbook for the sixteen personality factor 
questionnaire. Champaign, Ill.: Institute for Ability and Personality Testing.
Chamorro-Premuzic, T. (2007). Personality and individual differences. Oxford, 
England: Blackwell.
Chiao, J. Y., & Blizinsky, K. D. (2009). Culture–gene co-evolution of individualism–
collectivism and the serotonin transporter gene. Proceedings of the Royal Society B.
Clark, L. A. (1993). Schedule for Nonadaptive and Adaptive Personality (SNAP): 
Manual for administration and scoring [Computer software manual]. Minneapolis, 
MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Clark, L. A., Watson, D., & Mineka, S. (1994). Temperament, personality, and the 
mood and anxiety disorders. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 103, 103–103.
Collins, R. L., Kashdan, T. B., & Gollnisch, G. (2003). The feasibility of using cellular 
phones to collect ecological momentary assessment data: Application to alcohol 
consumption. Experimental and Clinical Psychopharmacology, 11(1), 73–78.
Comrey, A. L. (1995). Revised manual and handbook of interpretations for the 
Comrey Personality Scales. San Diego, CA: Educational and Industrial Testing 
Service.
Cooper, C. (1997). Individual differences. Oxford, England: Oxford Univeristy Press.
Corr, P. J. (2002). J. A. Gray’s reinforcement sensitivity theory and frustrative 
nonreward: A theoretical note on expectancies in reactions to rewarding stimuli. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 32(7), 1247–1253.
Corr, P. J. (2008). The reinforcement sensitivity theory of personality (P. J. Corr, Ed.). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1985). NEO PI professional manual. Odessa, FL: 
Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc.
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
117
OVERVIEW OF DIFFERENTIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1992a). Four ways five factors are basic. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 13(6), 653–665.
Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1992b). NEO PI-R professional manual. Odessa, FL: 
Psychological Assessment Resources, Inc.
Costa, P. T., Terracciano, A., & McCrae, R. R. (2001). Gender differences in 
personality traits across cultures: Robust and surprising findings. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 81(2), 322–331.
Costa, P. T., & Widiger, T. A. (2002). Personality disorders and the five-factor model 
of personality (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Craik, K. H. (2000). The lived day of an individual: A person-environment 
perspective. In W. B. Walsh, K. H. Craik, & R. H. Price (Eds.), Person-environment 
psychology: New directions and perspectives (2nd ed., p. 233–266). Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.
Cronbach, L. J. (1957). The two disciplines of scientific psychology. American 
Psychologist, 12, 671–684.
Cronbach, L. J. (1975). Beyond the two disciplines of scientific psychology. American 
Psychologist, 30, 116-127.
Crowley, S., Acebo, C., & Carskadon, M. (2007). Sleep, circadian rhythms, and 
delayed phase in adolescence. Sleep Medicine, 8(6), 602–612.
Cury, F., Elliot, A. J., Da Fonseca, D., & Moller, A. C. (2006). The social-cognitive 
model of achievement motivation and the 2 x 2 achievement goal framework. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 90(4), 666–679.
Dahlstrom, W. G. (1992). The growth in acceptance of the mmpi. Professional 
Psychology: Research and Practice, 23(5), 345–348.
Deary, I. J., Penke, L., & Johnson, W. (2010). The neuroscience of human intelligence 
differences. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11(3), 201–211.
Deary, I. J., Whiteman, M., Starr, J., Whalley, L., & Fox, H. (2004). The impact of 
childhood intelligence on later life: following up the Scottish mental surveys of 1932 
and 1947. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86(1), 130–147.
Depue, R. A. (1995). Neurobiological factors in personality and depression. European 
Journal of Personality, 9(5), 413–439.
 
Depue, R. A., & Collins, P. F. (1999). Neurobiology of the structure of personality: 
Dopamine, facilitation of incentive motivation, and extraversion. Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences, 22(3), 491–569.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
118
REVELLE, CONDON, WILT
DeYoung, C. G., Peterson, J. B., & Higgins, D. M. (2005). Sources of openness/
intellect: Cognitive and neuropsychological correlates of the fifth factor of 
personality. Journal of Personality, 73(4), 825–858.
Digman, J. M. (1990). Personality structure: Emergence of the five-factor model. 
Annual Review of Psychology., 41, 417–440.
Donnay, D. A. (1997). E.K. Strong’s legacy and beyond: 70 years of the strong interest 
inventory. Career Development Quarterly, 46(1), 2–22.
Driskell, J., & Olmstead, B. (1989). Psychology and the military: Research 
applications and trends. American Psychologist, 44(1), 43–54.
Dubuis, P. H. (1947). The classification program report no. 2 (Army Air Forces 
Aviation Psychology Program Research Reports). Defense Documentation Center 
Defense Supply Agency: Army Air Forces.
Dweck, C. S., & Leggett, E. L. (1988). A social-cognitive approach to motivation and 
personality. Psychological Review, 95(2), 256–273.
Eaton, L. G., & Funder, D. C. (2003). The creation and consequences of the social 
world: An interactional analysis of extraversion. European Journal of Personality, 
17(5), 375–395.
Eccles, J. S., & Wigfield, A. (2002). Motivational Beliefs, Values, and Goals. Annual 
review of psychology, 53(1), 109–132.
Elder, G. H. (1998). The life course as developmental theory. Child Development, 
69(1), 1–12.
Elliot, A. J., & Church, M. A. (1997). A hierarchical model of approach and avoidance 
achievement motivation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72(1), 218–232.
Elliot, A. J., & McGregor, H. A. (2001). A 2x2 achievement goal framework. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 80(3), 501–519.
Elliot, A. J., & Thrash, T. M. (2002).Approach-avoidance motivation in personality: 
Approach- avoidance temperaments and goals. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 82, 804–818.
 
Emmons, R. A. (1986). Personal strivings: An approach to personality and subjective 
well-being. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51(5), 1058–1068.
Emmons, R. A. (1989). Exploring the relations between motives and traits: The case 
of narcissism. In D. M. Buss & N. Cantor (Eds.), Personality psychology: Recent 
trends and emerging directions (p. 32–44). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Eysenck, H. J. (1952). The scientific study of personality. London,: Routledge & K. Paul.
Eysenck, H. J. (1953). Uses and abuses of psychology. London, Baltimore,: Penguin Books.
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
119
OVERVIEW OF DIFFERENTIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Eysenck, H. J. (1964). Sense and nonsense in psychology. Baltimore: Penguin Books.
Eysenck, H. J. (1965). Fact and fiction in psychology. Baltimore,: Penguin Books.
Eysenck, H. J. (1966). Personality and experimental psychology. Bulletin of the 
British Psychological Society, 19, 1–28.
Eysenck, H. J. (1967). The biological basis of personality. Springfield: Thomas.
Eysenck, H. J. (1990). Biological dimensions of personality. In L. A. Pervin (Ed.), 
Handbook of personality: Theory and research. (p. 244–276). New York, NY: 
Guilford Press.
Eysenck, H. J. (1992). A hundred years of personality research, from Heymans to 
modern times. Houten: Bohn, Stafleu Van Loghum.
Eysenck, H. J. (1997). Personality and experimental psychology: The unification 
of psychology and the possibility of a paradigm. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 73(6), 1224–1237.
Eysenck, H. J., & Eysenck, M. W. (1985). Personality and individual differences: a 
natural science approach. New York: Plenum Press.
Eysenck, H. J., & Eysenck, S. B. G. (1964). Eysenck Personality Inventory. San Diego, 
California: Educational and Industrial Testing Service.
Eysenck, H. J., & Himmelweit, H. T. (1947). Dimensions of personality; a record of 
research carried out in collaboration with H.T. Himmelweit [and others]. London: K. 
Paul, Trench.
Eysenck, M. W. (1994). Individual differences: normal and abnormal. Hove, England: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.
 
Feather, N. T. (1995). Values, valences, and choice: The influences of values on the 
perceived attractiveness and choice of alternatives. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 68(6), 1135–1151.
Feldman, L. A. (1995). Valence focus and arousal focus: Individual differences in the 
structure of affective experience. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 
153–166.
Ferriman, K., Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C. (2009). Work preferences, life values, and 
personal views of top math/science graduate students and the profoundly gifted: 
Developmental changes and gender differences during emerging adulthood and 
parenthood. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97(3), 517–532.
Fiske, D. W.(1949). Consistency of the factorial structures of personality ratings from 
different sources. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 44, 329–344.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
120
REVELLE, CONDON, WILT
Fleeson, W. (2001). Toward a structure- and process-integrated view of personality: 
Traits as density distributions of states. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
80(6), 1011–1027.
Fleeson, W., & Gallagher, P. (2009). The implications of big five standing for the 
distribution of trait manifestation in behavior: Fifteen experience-sampling studies 
and a meta-analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97(6), 1097–1114.
Flynn, J. R. (1984). The mean IQ of Americans: Massive gains 1932 to 1978. 
Psychological Bulletin, 95(1), 29–51.
Flynn, J. R. (1987). Massive IQ gains in 14 nations: What IQ tests really measure. 
Psychological Bulletin, 101(2), 171–191.
Flynn, J. R. (2000). IQ gains and fluid g. American Psychologist, 55(5), 543.
Fua, K., Revelle, W., & Ortony, A. (2010). Modeling personality and individual 
differences: the approach-avoid-conflict triad. In Cogsci 2010.
Funder, D. C. (2001). Personality. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 197–221.
Funder, D. C., Furr, R., & Colvin, C. (2000). The Riverside Behavioral Q-sort: A tool 
for the description of social behavior. Journal of Personality, 68(3), 451–489.
Furnham, A. (2005). The psychology of behaviour at work: The individual in the 
organization (2nd ed.). xiv, 821 pp. New York, NY: Psychology Press Psychology Press.
Galton, F. (1865).Hereditary talent and character. Macmillan’s Magazine, 12, 157–166.
Galton, F. (1879). Psychometric experiments. Brain, 2, 149–162.
Galton, F. (1884). Measurement of character. Fortnightly Review, 36, 179–185.
Galton, F. (1888). Co-relations and their measurement. Proceedings of the Royal 
Society. London Series, 45, 135–145.
Galton, F. (1892). Hereditary genius: an inquiry into its laws and consequences (2nd ed.). 
London: Macmillan and Co.
Goddard, H. H. (1908). The Binet and Simon tests of intellectual capacity. The 
Training School Bulletin, 5(10), 3–9.
Goldberg, L. R. (1990). An alternative “description of personality”: The big-five factor 
structure. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59(6), 1216–1229.
Goldberg, L. R. (1999). A broad-bandwidth, public domain, personality inventory 
measuring the lower-level facets of several five-factor models. In I. Mervielde, I. 
Deary, F. De Fruyt, & F. Ostendorf (Eds.), Personality psychology in Europe (Vol. 7, 
p. 7–28). Tilburg, The Netherlands: Tilburg University Press.
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
121
OVERVIEW OF DIFFERENTIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Goldberg, L. R., Johnson, J. A., Eber, H. W., Hogan, R., Ashton, M. C., Cloninger, 
C. R., et al. (2006). The international personality item pool and the future of public-
domain personality measures. Journal of Research in Personality, 40(1), 84–96.
Gosling, S. D., Vazire, S., Srivastava, S., & John, O. P. (2004). Should we trust 
web-based studies? A comparative analysis of six preconceptions about internet 
questionnaires. American Psychologist, 59(2), 93–104.
Gough, H. G. (1957). Manual for the California psychological inventory. Palo Alto, 
CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Gray, J. A. (1970). The psychophysiological basis of introversion-extraversion. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 8(3), 249–266.
 
Gray, J. A. (1981). A critique of Eysenck’s theory of personality. In H. J. Eysenck (Ed.), 
A model for personality (p. 246–277). Berlin: Springer.
Gray, J. A. (1982). Neuropsychological theory of anxiety: An investigation of the 
septal-hippocampal system. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gray, J. A., & McNaughton, N. (2000). The neuropsychology of anxiety: An enquiry 
into the functions of the septo-hippocampal system (2nd ed.). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Green, A. S., Rafaeli, E., Bolger, N., Shrout, P. E., & Reis, H. T. (2006). Paper or 
plastic? Data equivalence in paper and electronic diaries. Psychological Methods, 
11(1), 87–105.
Gruzka, A., Matthews, G., & Szymura, B. (Eds.). (2010). Handbook of individual 
differences in cognition: Attention, memory and executive control. Springer.
Guilford, J. P. (1956). The structure of intellect. Psychological Bulletin, 53(4), 267–293.
Guilford, J. P. (1959). Three faces of intellect. American Psychologist, 14(8), 469–479.
Guilford, J. P., & Zimmerman, W. S. (1949). The Guilford-Zimmerman temperament 
survey. Oxford, England: Sheridan Supply Co.
Hathaway, S., & McKinley, J. (1943). Manual for administering and scoring the 
MMPI. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Hathaway, S., & McKinley, J. (1951). Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory; 
manual. New York: The Psychological Corporation.
Heist, P. A., & Williams, P. A. (1957). Manual for the omnibus personality inventory. 
Berkeley, CA: Center for the study of higher education, University of California.
Herrington, J. D., Koven, N. S., Miller, G. A., & Heller, W. (2006). Mapping the neural 
correlates of dimensions of personality, emotion, and motivation. In T. Canli (Ed.), Biology 
of personality and individual differences (p. 133-156). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
122
REVELLE, CONDON, WILT
Higgins, E. T. (1998). Promotion and prevention: Regulatory focus as a motivational 
principle. In Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 30, p. 1–46). Academic 
Press Inc Ltd.
 
Hilgard, E. R. (1980). The trilogy of mind: Cognition, affection, and conation. 
Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences, 16, 107–117.
Hofstee, W. K., Raad, B. de, & Goldberg, L. R. (1992a). Integration of the big five 
and circumplex approaches to trait structure. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 63(1), 146–163.
Hofstee, W. K., Raad, B. de, & Goldberg, L. R. (1992b). Integration of the big five 
and circumplex approaches to trait structure. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 63(1), 146–163.
Hogan, R. (1994). Trouble at the top: Causes and consequences of managerial 
incompetence. Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research, 46(1), 9–15.
Hogan, R. (2007). Personality and the fate of organizations. ix, 167 pp. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.
Hogan, R., & Hogan, J. (1995). The Hogan personality inventory manual (2nd. ed.). 
Tulsa, OK: Hogan Assessment Systems.
Hogan, R., Raskin, R., & Fazzini, D. (1990). The dark side of charisma. In K. E. Clark 
& M. B. Clark (Eds.), Measures of leadership (p. 343–354). West Orange, NJ, USA: 
Leadership Library of America, Inc.
Holland, J. L. (1959). A theory of vocational choice. Journal of Counseling 
Psychology, 6(1), 35–45.
Holland, J. L. (1996). Exploring careers with a typology: What we have learned and 
some new directions. American Psychologist, 51(4), 397–406.
Hong, Y., Chiu, C., Dweck, C. S., Lin, D. M. S., & Wan, W. (1999). Implicit theories, 
attributions, and coping: A meaning system approach. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 77(3), 588–599.
Horn, J. L., & Cattell, R. B. (1966). Refinement and test of the theory of fluid and 
crystallized general intelligence. Journal of Educational Psychology, 57(5), 253–270.
Hunt, E., & Wittmann, W. (2008). National intelligence and national prosperity. 
Intelligence, 36(1), 1–9.
John, O. P. (1990). The“big five” factor taxonomy: Dimensions of personality in 
the natural language and in questionnaires. In L. A. Pervin & O. P. John (Eds.), 
Handbook of personality: Theory and research (p. 66-100). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
 
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
123
OVERVIEW OF DIFFERENTIAL PSYCHOLOGY
John, O. P., & Srivastava, S. (1999). The big five trait taxonomy: History, measurement, 
and theoretical perspectives. In L. A. Pervin & O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of 
personality: Theory and research (2nd ed.) (p. 102–138). New York, NY: Guilford 
Press Guilford Press.
Johnson, J. A. (1997). Units of analysis for the description and explanation of 
personality. In R. Hogan, J. A. Johnson, & S. R. Briggs (Eds.), Handbook of 
personality psychology (p. 73–93). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Johnson, J. A., & Ostendorf, F. (1993). Clarification of the five-factor model with 
the abridged big five dimensional circumplex. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 65(3), 563–576.
Johnson, W. (in press). Understanding the genetics of intelligence: Can height help? 
can corn oil. Current Directions in Psychological Science.
Johnson, W., & Bouchard Jr., T. J. (2005). The structure of human intelligence: It is 
verbal, perceptual, and image rotation (vpr), not fluid and crystallized. Intelligence, 
33(4), 393 - 416.
Johnson, W., & Bouchard Jr., T. J. (2007). Sex differences in mental abilities: g masks 
the dimensions on which they lie. Intelligence, 35(1), 23–39.
Jones, L., & Thissen, D. (2007). A history and overview of psychometrics. Handbook 
of Statistics, 26, 1–28.
Kelly, E. L. (1955). Consistency of the adult personality. American Psychologist, 
10 (11), 659–681.
Kelly, E. L., & Fiske, D. W. (1950). The prediction of success in the va training 
program in clinical psychology. American Psychologist, 5(8), 395–406.
Kelly, E. L., & Fiske, D. W. (1951). The prediction of performance in clinical 
psychology. Ann Arbor, Michigan: University of Michigan Press.
Kluckhohn, C., & Murray, H. A. (1948). Personality in nature, society, and culture. 
New York: A. A. Knopf.
Kraft, P., & Hunter, D. J. (2009). Genetic risk prediction– are we there yet? The New 
England Journal of Medicine, 360(17), 1701–1703.
Krueger, R. F. (2002). Psychometric perspectives on comorbidity. In J. E. Helzer & J. J. 
Hudziak (Eds.), Defining psychopathology in the 21st century: Dsm-v and beyond (p. 
41–54). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc American Psychiatric 
Publishing, Inc.
 Krueger, R. F., Caspi, A., Moffitt, T. E., Silva, P. A., & McGee, R. (1996). Personality 
traits are differentially linked to mental disorders: A multitrait-multidiagnosis study 
of an adolescent birth cohort. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 105(3), 299–312.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
124
REVELLE, CONDON, WILT
Krueger, R. F., & Markon, K. E. (2006). Understanding psychopathology: Melding 
behavior genetics, personality, and quantitative psychology to develop an empir- 
ically based model. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 15(3), 113–117.
Kuncel, N. R., Hezlett, S. A., & Ones, D. S. (2001). A comprehensive meta-analysis of 
the predictive validity of the graduate record examinations: Implications for graduate 
student selection and performance. Psychological Bulletin, 127(1), 162–181.
Kuncel, N. R., Kuncel, N. R., Crede´, M., & Thomas, L. L. (2007). A meta-analysis 
of the predictive validity of the Graduate Management Admission Test (GMAT) 
and undergraduate grade point average (UGPA) for graduate student academic 
performance. The Academy of Management Learning and Education, 6(1), 51–68.
Leary, M., & Hoyle, R. H. (2009). Handbook of individual differences in social 
behavior (M. Leary & R. H. Hoyle, Eds.). New York, N.Y.: Guilford Press.
Little, B. R., Lecci, L., & Watkinson, B. (1992). Personality and personal projects: 
Linking big five and pac units of analysis. Journal of Personality, 60(2), 501–525.
Lofquist, L. H., & Dawis, R. V. (1969). Adjustment to work. New York: 
Appleton-Century-Crofts.
London, H., & Exner, J. E. (1978). Dimensions of personality. New York: Wiley.
Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C. P. (2000). States of excellence. American Psychologist, 
55(1), 137–150.
Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C. P. (2006). Study of mathematically precocious youth after 
35 years: Uncovering antecedents for the development of math-science expertise. 
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 1(4), 316–345.
Markon, K. E., Krueger, R. F., & Watson, D. (2005). Delineating the structure of 
normal and abnormal personality: An integrative hierarchical approach. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 88(1), 139–157.
Mayer, J. D. (2001). Primary divisions of personality and their scientific contributions: 
From the trilogy-of-mind to the systems set. Journal for the Theory of Social 
Behaviour, 31(4), 449–477.
 McAdams, D. P. (2008). Personal narratives and the life story. In Handbook of 
personality: Theory and research (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
McCrae, R. R. (1987). Creativity, divergent thinking, and openness to experience. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52(6), 1258–1265.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, J., Paul T. (1997). Personality trait structure as a human 
universal. American Psychologist, 52(5), 509–516.
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
125
OVERVIEW OF DIFFERENTIAL PSYCHOLOGY
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, J., Paul T. (1999). A five-factor theory of personality. In L. A. 
Pervin & O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research (2nd ed.) 
(p. 139–153). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
McGrew, K. (2009). CHC theory and the human cognitive abilities project: Standing 
on the shoulders of the giants of psychometric intelligence research. Intelligence, 
37(1), 1–10.
McGue, M., & Bouchard, J., Thomas J. (1998). Genetic and environmental influences 
on human behavioral differences. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 21, 1–24.
McPherson, W. B. (1901). Gideon’s water-lappers. Journal of the American Oriental 
Society, 22, 70–75.
Mehl, M. R., Gosling, S. D., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2006). Personality in its natural 
habitat: Manifestations and implicit folk theories of personality in daily life. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 90(5), 862–877.
Mehl, M. R., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2003). The sounds of social life: A psychometric 
analysis of students’ daily social environments and natural conversations. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 84(4), 857–870.
Mehl, M. R., Vazire, S., Ramirez-Esparza, N., Slatcher, R. B., & Pennebaker, J. W. 
(2007). Are women really more talkative than men? Science, 317(5834), 82.
Morley, H. (1891). Character writings of the seventeenth century. London: Kessinger 
Publishing, LLC.
Mount, M. K., Barrick, M. R., Scullen, S. M., & Rounds, J. (2005). Higher-order 
dimensions of the big five personality traits and the big six vocational interest types. 
Personnel Psychology, 58(2), 447–478.
Murray, H. A. (1938). Explorations in personality: a clinical and experimental study of 
fifty men of college age. New York: Oxford university press.
 
Musson, D. M., Sandal, G. M., & Helmreich, R. L. (2004). Personality characteristics 
and trait clusters in final stage astronaut selection. Aviation, space, and 
environmental medicine, 75(4), 342–349.
Norman, W. T. (1963). Toward an adequate taxonomy of personality attributes: 
Replicated factors structure in peer nomination personality ratings. Journal of 
Abnormal and Social Psychology, 66(6), 574–583.
Norman, W. T. (1969). “to see ourseles as ithers see us”: Relations among self-
perceptions, peer-perceptions, and expected peer-perceptions of personality 
attributes. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 4(4), 417–443.
Omura, K., Constable, R., & Canli, T. (2005). Amygdala gray matter concentration 
is associated with extraversion and neuroticism. Neuroreport: For Rapid 
Communication of Neuroscience Research, 16(17), 1905–1908.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
126
REVELLE, CONDON, WILT
Ortony, A., Norman, D. A., & Revelle, W. (2005). Affect and proto-affect in effective 
functioning. In J. Fellous & M. Arbib (Eds.), Who needs emotions? The brain meets 
the machine. (p. 173–202). New York: Oxford Univeristy Press.
Os, J. van, & Rutten, B. P. F. (2009). Gene-environment- wide interaction studies in 
psychiatry. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166(9), 964–966.
OSS Assessment Staff. (1948). Assessment of men: Selection of personnel for the office 
of strategic services. New York: Rinehart.
Ozer, D. J., & Benet-Martinez, V. (2006). Personality and the prediction of 
consequential outcomes. Annual Review of Psychology Vol 57 2006, 401-421, 57, 
401–421.
Padilla, A., Hogan, R., & Kaiser, R. B. (2007). The toxic triangle: Destructive leaders, 
susceptible followers, and conducive environments. Leadership Quarterly, 18(3), 
176–194.
Paunonen, S. V. (2003). Big five factors of personality and replicated predictions of 
behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84(2), 411–422.
Pearson, K. P. (1896). Mathematical contributions to the theory of evolution. iii. 
regression, heredity, and panmixia. Philisopical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London. Series A, 187, 254–318.
 
Pedersen, N. L., Plomin, R., McClearn, G. E., & Friberg, L. (1988). Neuroticism, 
extraversion, and related traits in adult twins reared apart and reared together. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55(6), 950–957.
Pervin, L. A. (1994). A critical analysis of current trait theory. Psychological Inquiry, 
5(2), 103–113.
Plato. (1991). The Republic : the complete and unabridged Jowett translation (Vintage 
classics ed.; B. Jowett, Ed.). New York: Vintage Books.
Plomin, R., Owen, M., & McGuffin, P. (1994). The genetic basis of complex human 
behaviors. Science, 264(5166), 1733–1739.
Rafaeli, E., Rogers, G. M., & Revelle, W. (2007). Affective synchrony: Individual 
differences in mixed emotions. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,33(7), 
915–932.
Rauch, S. L., Milad, M. R., Orr, S. P., Quinn, B. T., Fischl, B., & Pitman, R. K. (2005). 
Orbitofrontal thickness, retention of fear extinction, and extraversion. Neuroreport: 
For Rapid Communication of Neuroscience Research, 16(17), 1909–1912.
Reid, S. C., Kauer, S. D., Dudgeon, P., Sanci, L. A., Shrier, L. A., & Patton, G. C. 
(2008). A mobile phone program to track young people’s experiences of mood, stress 
and coping: Development and testing of the mobiletype program. Social Psychiatary 
and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 44, 501–507.
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
127
OVERVIEW OF DIFFERENTIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Revelle, W. (2007). Experimental approaches to the study of personality. In R. Robins, 
R. C. Fraley, & R. F. Krueger (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in personality 
psychology. (p. 37–61). New York: Guilford.
Revelle, W. (2008). The contribution of reinforcement sensitivity theory to 
personality theory. In P. J. Corr (Ed.), The reinforcement sensitivity theory of 
personality (p. 508–527). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Revelle, W., Humphreys, M. S., Simon, L., & Gilliland, K. (1980). Interactive effect 
of personality, time of day, and caffeine – test of the arousal model. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology General, 109(1), –-31.
Revelle, W., & Oehleberg, K. (2008). Integrating experimental and observational 
personality research – the contributions of Hans Eysenck. Journal of Personality, 
76 (6), 1387–1414.
 
Revelle, W., Wilt, J., & Rosenthal, A. (2010). Personality and cognition: The 
personality-cognition link. In A. Gruszka, G. Matthews, & B. Szymura (Eds.), 
Handbook of individual differences in cognition: Attention, memory and executive 
control (p. 27–49). Springer.
Roberts, B. W., & DelVecchio, W. F. (2000). The rank-order consistency of personality 
traits from childhood to old age: A quantitative review of longitudinal studies. 
Psychological Bulletin, 126(1), 3–25.
Roberts, B. W., Kuncel, N. R., Shiner, R., Caspi, A., & Goldberg, L. R. (2007). The 
power of personality: The comparative validity of personality traits, socioeconomic 
status, and cognitive ability for predicting important life outcomes. Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, 2(4), 313–345.
Roberts, B. W., O’Donnell, M., & Robins, R. W. (2004). Goal and personality trait 
development in emerging adulthood. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
87(4), 541–550.
Roberts, B. W., & Robins, R. W. (2000). Broad dispositions, broad aspirations: 
The intersection of personality traits and major life goals. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 26(10), 1284–1296.
Robins, R. W., Fraley, R. C., & Krueger, R. F. (2007). Handbook of research methods 
in personality psychology. Handbook of research methods in personality psychology. 
xiii, 719 pp. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Rohan, M. J. (2000). A rose by any name? the values construct. Personality and Social 
Psychology Review, 4(3), 255–277.
Rosato, E., & Kyriacou, C. P. (2008). Sleep, arousal, and rhythms in flies. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(50), 19567–19568.
Rozin, P. (2007). Exploring the landscape of modern academic psychology: Finding 
and filling the holes. American Psychologist, 62(8), 754–766.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
128
REVELLE, CONDON, WILT
Russell, J. A. (1980). A circumplex model of affect. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 39(6), 1161–1178.
Schaie, K. W. (2005). Developmental influences on adult intelligence: The Seattle 
longitudinal study. Oxford University Press, USA.
Schimmack, U., & Grob, A. (2000). Dimensional models of core affect: A quantitative 
comparison by means of structural equation modeling. European Journal of 
Personality, 14(4), 325–345.
 
Schimmack, U., & Reisenzein, R. (2002). Experiencing activation: Energetic arousal 
and tense arousal are not mixtures of valence and activation. Emotion, 2(4),412–417.
Schmitt, D. P., Realo, A., Voracek, M., & Allik, J. (2008). Why can’t a man be more 
like a woman? sex differences in big five personality traits across 55 cultures. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 94(1), 168–182.
Schwartz, S. H., & Bilsky, W. (1987). Toward a universal psychological structure of 
human values. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53(3), 550–562.
Smillie, L. D. (2008). What is reinforcement sensitivity theory. European Journal of 
Personality, 22(5), 359–384.
Smillie, L. D. (in press). What is reinforcement sensitivity? Neuroscience paradigms 
for approach-avoidance processes in personality. European Journal of Personality.
Smillie, L. D., Loxton, N. J., & Avery, R. E. (in press). Reinforcement Sensitivity 
Theory, Research, Applications and Future. In A. F. F. Tomas Chamorro-Premuzic & 
S. von Stumm (Eds.), Handbook of individual differences. Wiley-Blackwell.
Smillie, L. D., Pickering, A. D., & Jackson, C. J. (2006). The new reinforcement 
sensitivity theory: Implications for personality measurement. Personality and Social 
Psychology Review, 10(4), 320–335.
Spearman, C. (1904a). “general intelligence,” objectively determined and measured. 
American Journal of Psychology, 15(2), 201–292.
Spearman, C. (1904b). The proof and measurement of association between two 
things. The American Journal of Psychology, 15(1), 72–101.
Spearman, C. (1946). Theory of general factor. British Journal of Psychology, 36(3), 
117–131.
Spinath, F. M., & Johnson, W. (in press). Behavior genetics. In T. Chamorro-
Premuzic, A. Furnham, & S. von Stumm (Eds.), The handbook of individual  
differences. Wiley-Blackwell.
Stankov, L. (2009). Conservatism and cognitive ability. Intelligence, 37(3), 294–304.
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
129
OVERVIEW OF DIFFERENTIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Steinmayr, R., Beauducel, A., & Spinath, B. (2010). Do sex differences in a faceted 
model of fluid and crystallized intelligence depend on the method applied? 
Intelligence, 38(1), 101–110.
Stern, W. (1910). Abstracts of lectures on the psychology of testimony and on the 
study of individuality. The American Journal of Psychology, 21(2), 270–282.
Stern, W. (1914). The psychological methods of testing intelligence (Guy Monrose 
Whipple (translator), Ed.). Warwick & York.
Stigler, S. M. (1989). Francis Galton’s account of the invention of correlation. 
Statistical Science, 4(73–86).
Strelau, J. (1998). Temperament: A psychological perspective. New York, NY: Plenum Press.
Strelau, J., & Eysenck, H. J. (1987). Personality dimensions and arousal. New York: 
Plenum Press.
Strong, E. K. (1927). Vocational interest test. Educational Record, 8(2), 107–121.
Tackett, J. L., Silberschmidt, A. L., Krueger, R. F., & Sponheim, S. R. (2008). 
A dimensional model of personality disorder: Incorporating dsm cluster a 
characteristics. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 117(2),454–459.
Taillard, J., Philip, P., Coste, O., Sagaspe, P., & Bioulac, B. (2003). The circadian 
and homeostatic modulation of sleep pressure during wakefulness differs between 
morning and evening chronotypes. Journal of sleep research, 12(4), 275–282.
Terman, L. M. (1916). The Measurement of intelligence. Houghton Mifflin.
Terman, L. M. (1925). Genetic studies of genius .. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Terman, L. M., & Oden, M. (1947). Genetic studies of genius. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford 
University Press; Oxford University Press.
Thayer, R. E. (1989). The biopsychology of mood and arousal. The biopsychology of 
mood and arousal. xi, 234 pp. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Theophrastus. (1909). Theophastou charakt*eres: The characters of theophrastus; 
an english translation from a revised text (new ed.; R. C. Jebb & J. E. S. (translator), 
Eds.). London,: Macmillan and co., limited.
Thomson, G. H. (1935). The definition and measurement of “g” (general 
intelligence). Journal of Educational Psychology, 26(4), 241–262.
Thomson, S. (1951). The factorial analysis of human ability (5th ed.). University of 
London Press London.
 
Thurstone, L. L. (1933). The theory of multiple factors. Ann Arbor, Michigan: 
Edwards Brothers.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
130
REVELLE, CONDON, WILT
Thurstone, L. L. (1935). The vectors of mind: multiple-factor analysis for the isolation 
of primary traits. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.
Thurstone, L. L. (1947). Multiple-factor analysis: a development and expansion of the 
vectors of the mind. Chicago, Ill.: The University of Chicago Press.
Trull, T. J., & Sher, K. J. (1994). Relationship between the five-factor model of 
personality and Axis I disorders in a nonclinical sample. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 103(2), 350–360.
Tupes, E. C., & Christal, R. E. (1961). Recurrent personality factors based on trait 
ratings (Tech. Rep. No. 61–97). Lackland Air Force Base: USAF ASD Technical Report.
Underwood, B. J. (1975). Individual differences as a crucible in theory construction. 
American Psychologist,30, 128–134.
Van de Vijver, F., & Leung, K. (2008). Personality in cultural context: Methodological 
issues. Journal of Personality, 69(6), 1007–1031.
van der Werff, J. J., & Verster, J. (1987). Heymans’ temperamental dimensions 
recomputed. Personality and Individual Differences, 8(2), 271–276.
Vazire, S., & Gosling, S. D. (2003). Bridging psychology and biology with animal 
research. American Psychologist, 58(5), 407–408.
Vazire, S., Gosling, S. D., Dickey, A. S., & Schapiro, S. J. (2007). Measuring 
personality in nonhuman animals. In R. W. Robins, R. C. Fraley, & R. F. Krueger 
(Eds.), Handbook of research methods in personality psychology (p. 190-206). New 
York, NY: Guilford Press.
Vernon, P. E. (1965). Ability factors and environmental influences. American 
Psychologist, 20(9), 723–733.
Vul, E., Harris, C., Winkielman, P., & Pashler, H. (2009). Puzzlingly high 
correlations in fmri studies of emotion, personality, and social cognition. 
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 4(3), 274–290.
Wacker, J., Chavanon, M.-L., & Stemmler, G. (2006). Investigating the dopaminergic 
basis of extraversion in humans: A multilevel approach. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 91(1), 171–187.
Warren, J. R., & Heist, P. A. (1960). Personality attributes of gifted college students. 
Science, 132(3423), 330–337. Available from http://www.jstor.org/stable/1706065
Watson, D. (2000). Mood and temperament. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Watson, D. (2005). Rethinking the mood and anxiety disorders: a quantitative 
hierarchical model for DSM-V. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 114(4), 522.
COURSE GUIDE: Educational Psychology
131
OVERVIEW OF DIFFERENTIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief 
measures of positive and negative affect: The PANAS scales. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 54(6), 1063–1070.
Watson, D., Gamez, W., & Simms, L. (2005). Basic dimensions of temperament and 
their relation to anxiety and depression: A symptom-based perspective. Journal of 
Research in Personality, 39(1), 46–66.
Widiger, T. A., & Costa, P. T. (1994). Personality and personality disorders. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, 103(1), 78–91.
Wiggins, J. S. (1973). Personality and prediction: principles of personality assessment. 
Malabar, Fla.: R.E. Krieger Pub. Co.
Willerman, L. (1979). The psychology of individual and group differences. San 
Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
 
Wilt, J., & Revelle, W. (2009). Extraversion. In M. Leary & R. H. Hoyle (Eds.), 
Handbook of individual differences in social behavior (p. 27–45). New York, N.Y.: 
Guilford Press.
Winter, D. G., John, O. P., Stewart, A. J., Klohnen, E. C., & Duncan, L. E. (1998). 
Traits and motives: Toward an integration of two traditions in personality research. 
Psychological Review, 105(2), 230–250.
Wittmann, W. W. (1991). Meta-analysis and brunswik symmetry. In Social 
prevention and the social sciences: Theoretical controversies, research problems, and 
evaluation strategies (p. 381–393). Oxford, England: Walter De Gruyter.
Wundt, W. (1874). Grundzu¨ ge der physiologischen psychologie (principles of 
physiological psychology). Leipzig/Bristol: Wilhelm Engelmann/Thoemmes Press.
Wundt, W. (1904). Principles of physiological psychology (Translated from the Fifth 
German Edition (1902) ed.). London: Swan Sonnenschein.
Yerkes, R. M. (1918). Psychology in relation to the war. Psychological Review, 25(2), 
85–115.
Zenderland, L. (2001). Measuring minds: Henry Herbert Goddard and the origins of 
American intelligence testing. Cambridge, UK.: Cambridge Univ Press.
