Foundations 
of Education
WINDOWS ON PRACTICE GUIDE
B.Ed. (Hons.) Elementary
2012
semester 5

This product has been made possible by the support of  the American People through the United States Agency for 
International Development (USAID). The contents of  this report are the sole responsibility of  the authors, and do 
not necessarily reflect the views of  USAID or the United States Government.
Technical Support: Education Development Center (EDC); Teachers College, Columbia University
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
ii
Foreword
Teacher education in Pakistan is leaping into the future. This updated Scheme of  Studies is the latest 
milestone in a journey that began in earnest in 2006 with the development of  a National Curriculum, 
which was later augmented by the 2008 National Professional Standards for Teachers in Pakistan and 
the 2010 Curriculum of  Education Scheme of  Studies. With these foundations in place, the Higher 
Education Commission (HEC) and the USAID Teacher Education Project engaged faculty across the 
nation to develop detailed syllabi and course guides for the four-year B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary and the 
two-year Associate Degree in Education (ADE).
The syllabi and course guides have been reviewed by the National Curriculum Review Committee 
(NCRC ) and the syllabi are approved as the updated Scheme of  Studies for the ADE and B.Ed. (Hons) 
Elementary programmes.
As an educator, I am especially inspired by the creativity and engagement of  this updated Scheme of  
Studies. It offers the potential for a seismic change in how we educate our teachers and ultimately our 
country’s youngsters. Colleges and universities that use programmes like these provide their students 
with the universally valuable tools of  critical thinking, hands-on learning, and collaborative study .
I am grateful to all who have contributed to this exciting process; in particular the faculty and staff  
from universities, colleges, and provincial institutions who gave freely of  their time and expertise for 
the purpose of  preparing teachers with the knowledge, skills, and dispositions required for nurturing 
students in elementary grades. Their contributions to improving the quality of  basic education in 
Pakistan are incalculable. I would also like to thank the distinguished NCRC members, who helped 
further enrich the curricula by their recommendations. The generous support received from the 
United States Agency for International Development (USAID) enabled HEC to draw on technical 
assistance and subject-matter expertise of  the scholars at Education Development Center, Inc., and 
Teachers College, Columbia University . Together, this partnership has produced a vitally important 
resource for Pakistan.
PROF . DR SOHAIL NAQVI
Executive Director
Higher Education Commission
Islamabad
HOW THIS COURSE GUIDE W AS DEVELOPED
iii
How the Windows on Practice  
guide was developed
As part of  nationwide reforms to improve the quality of  teacher education, the 
Higher Education Commission (HEC), with technical assistance from the USAID 
Teacher Education Project, engaged faculty across the nation to develop detailed 
syllabi for courses in the new four-year B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary programme. 
The process of  designing the syllabus for each course in years 3–4 of  the pro-
gramme began with a curriculum design workshop. Deans and directors from 
universities where these courses will be taught identified faculty to attend the 
workshop. The first workshop included national and international subject matter 
experts who led participants in a seminar focused on a review and update of  sub-
ject (content) knowledge. The remainder of  this workshop was spent reviewing the 
HEC scheme of  studies, organizing course content across the semester, developing 
detailed unit descriptions, and preparing the course syllabi. Although the course 
syllabi are designed primarily for Student Teachers taking the course, they are 
useful resources for teacher educators, too. 
Following the initial workshop, faculty participants developed teaching notes that 
include ideas for teaching units of  studies and related resources. Working individu-
ally or in groups, participants focused on their teaching methods and strategies and 
how they could be useful to the future teachers of  the course. Subsequent work-
shops were held over the course of  a year to give faculty sufficient time to com-
plete their work, engage in peer review , and receive critical feedback from national 
and international consultants. In designing both the syllabi and the teaching 
notes, faculty and subject matter experts were guided by the National Professional 
Standards for Teachers in Pakistan (2009). 
All of  the syllabi developed by faculty who participated in the process are included 
in this document, along with a list of  topical teaching notes. Additional references 
and resources appear at the end of  the document. These should provide a rich 
resource for faculty who will teach the course in the future. A sample syllabus with 
accompanying teaching notes is included to provide new Instructors with a model 
for developing curricula and planning to teach. This Windows on Practice guide 
is not intended to provide a complete curriculum with a standard syllabus and 
fully developed units of  study , but rather aims to suggest ideas and resources for 
Instructors to use in their own planning. Hence, readers will find sample units and 
materials that reflect the perspective of  faculty designers rather than prescriptions 
for practice.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
iv
We respect intellectual property rights and to the best of  our knowledge, we have 
not included any suggested materials that are copyright protected or for which we 
have not secured explicit permission to use. Therefore, all materials included may 
be used in classrooms for educational purposes. Materials in this document are not 
intended for commercial use, however. They may not be used in other publications 
without securing permission for their use.
Initial drafts were reviewed by the National Curriculum Review Committee 
(NCRC) and suggestions were incorporated into final drafts, which were then 
submitted to the NCRC for approval.  
Faculty involved in course design: Abdul Hameed Soomro, Shah Abdul Latif  
University , Khairpur; Allah Noor, University of  Education, Gomal University; Dr 
Amtul Hafeez, Allama Iqbal Open University , Islamabad; Dr Asif  Khan, Karakorum 
International University , Gilgit; Aslam Komboh, University of  Sindh, Hyderabad; 
Dr Muhammad Shahid Farooq, University of  the Punjab, Lahore; Izaz Ali, Institute 
of  Educational Research (IER), University of  Peshawar; Dr Muhammad Nauman, 
Institute of  Educational Research, University of  Peshawar; Dr Mussaret Anwar 
Sheikh, Fatima Jinnah Women University (FJWU), Rawalpindi; Naila Siddiqua, 
University of  Karachi; Dr Sadaf  Ayoob Raja, FJWU, Rawalpindi. 
Subject and content specialist leading the seminar: Dr Mahmood ul Hasan Butt, 
Chief  of  Party , USAID Teacher Education Project.
International curriculum specialist guiding course design: Frances Schoonmaker, 
Professor Emeritus, Teachers College, Columbia University .
Date of  NCRC review process: 11–12 January 2013 
NCRC reviewers: Dr Bernadette Dean, St. Joseph’s College for Women, Karachi; 
Dr Rizwan Akram Rana, IER, University of  Punjab; Dr Abdul Hameed, University 
of  Management and Technology , Lahore; Rasul B. Raisani, University of  
Balochistan.

T able of contents
1 Rationale for a course on foundations  07
 of education
2 Course syllabi  10
  Syllabus 1: Abdul Hameed Soomro  11
  Syllabus 2: Dr Asif Khan and Naila Siddiqua  19
  Syllabus 3: Aslam Komboh  23
  Syllabus 4: Izaz Ali and Dr Muhammad Nauman  30
3 Representative syllabi with teaching notes  37 
  Example 1: Dr Muhammad Shahid Farooq,  38 
  Allah Noor , Dr Amtul Hafeez
  Example 2: Dr Mussaret Sheikh and  57 
  Sadaf A yoob Raja
4 Integrated teaching notes  80 
5 Additional resources  91
6 Methods and strategies to use in teaching  96 
 and learning this course
COURSE GUIDE:  Foundations of  Education
07
Rationale for a 
course on foundations 
of education
1
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
08
Introduction
In the HEC 2010 document, Curriculum of  Education: B.Ed (Hons.) 4-year Degree 
Programme (Elementary & Secondary, Associate Degree in Education, M. Ed./Ms. Education), 
the course Foundations of  Education was designed to focus on the ideological, philo-
sophical, psychological, socio-economic, and historical foundations of  education. The 
major focus will be on developing Student Teachers’ understanding of  how different 
philosophical theories affect education. The course will also include the historical 
development of  education in Pakistan. The emphasis will be on analysing various 
sociological, political, economic, and ideological forces that influence the process of  
education in our cultural context. This course will also help Student Teachers develop 
the ability to interpret knowledge within its historical, philosophical, ideological, and 
social contexts, which will contribute to critical perspectives on education both within 
and outside of  schools.
Common misconceptions about 
foundations of education
Student Teachers are likely to enter their programme with various common miscon-
ceptions about the study of  educational foundations. The public often shares these 
misconceptions. The course Instructor needs to be aware of  these common miscon-
ceptions and of  others unique to the students. By confronting and critiquing miscon-
ceptions, Student Teachers can become intelligent creators, users, and interpreters of  
the policies and practices of  the schools within the communities in which they work. 
The following are common misconceptions:
• Introduction to Education and Foundations of  Education are the same course  
 with different titles.
• Foundations of  education have no practical value for classroom teachers.
• To understand educational foundations you have to study all of  the individual  
 subjects that contribute to the foundations.
• The Student Teacher’s own perspective is irrelevant to learning the foundations  
 of  education.
A note about misconceptions
Introduction to Education is an important course that helps new or potential educa-
tion majors understand what schools are like, current practices and policies, and how 
children learn.
A Foundations of  Education course may address some of  the same topics, but the 
focus is always on understanding how things became the way they are by studying the 
history and underpinnings of  current practices. Assumptions about human beings – 
who they are and what they value – are the driving forces of  education in the past and 
the present.
By learning to look at education with a critical, historical perspective that questions 
current policies and practices, Student Teachers equip themselves to be thoughtful 
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
09
participants in the profession. While many disciplines inform the foundations of  edu-
cation, it is their interaction rather than their isolation that contributes to what people 
accept as ‘the way things are’. By understanding the dynamic nature of  education, 
Student Teachers look not only at ‘the way things are’, but also beyond the present 
to ‘how things got to be’ and ‘the way things ought to be’. Such a study is dynamic, 
interactive, participatory , and exciting.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
10
Course syllabi 
2
FOUNDATIONS OF EDUCATION
COURSE GUIDE:  Foundations of  Education
11
FOUNDATIONS OF EDUCATION
This section contains syllabi that have been written by individual faculty or groups of  
faculty . Using the HEC Scheme of  Studies for the course, they considered the balance 
between the demands of  the subject itself, active learning pedagogies, their students, 
and the particular university milieu in which they work. The syllabi all reflect the 
same key concepts and broad goals, but they vary in sequence and emphasis. 
SYLLABUS 1
By
Abdul Hameed Soomro
Faculty
Social Sciences (Education)
Year/Semester
Year 4, Semester 5
Credit hours
3 credits
 
Prerequisites
Successful completion of semesters 1–4
Course description
The purpose of  this course is to help Student Teachers recognize the worth of  the 
foundations of  education, and examine their role and significance in the whole 
process of  education in Pakistan. Student Teachers will develop a comprehensive 
understanding of  the terms foundations and education in light of  the various ideo-
logical, philosophical, psychological, sociological, and historical perspectives that 
have influenced education. Foundations are essentially basic ways of  thinking about 
schooling and the formal processes of  education. The course will inform them about 
the influence of  social forces, such as politics, social structure, culture, history , and 
economics, on the selection of  content, the methods of  teaching, and the aims of  edu-
cation. Student Teachers will examine the classical and contemporary philosophical 
perspectives on education, the significance of  societal culture and its social structure 
in education, and how education in return strengthens both, as well as the significance 
of  psychology in the teaching-learning process.
Course goal
To understand the value and worth of  the philosophical, sociological, psychological, 
and historical disciplines and their influence on framing the perspective of  education.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
12
Learning outcomes
At the end of  this course, Student Teachers will understand the following: 
• the concepts of foundations and education
• the influence of  the disciplines that constitute the foundations of  education on  
 educational thought and practice
• the interaction of  the social, political, and economic structures of  Pakistani   
 society
• how social structure and culture cause individual action
• how these structures and cultures interact with the disciplines of  the  
 foundations and actually bear on instruction. 
Student Teachers will be able to:
• differentiate between the various schools of  thought that have influenced   
 education on the whole and education in Pakistan in particular
• explain the idea of  education and the social and philosophical influences on it 
• evaluate the social structure of  Pakistani society and the role of  education in   
 strengthening it. 
Essential questions
• What is education?
• What are the basic thoughts about education? 
• How have Pakistanis conceptualized education? 
• What has been the history of  education in general? In Pakistan?
• How does the history of  education influence the future of  education in Pakistan?
• What should education be like in the future, both worldwide and in Pakistan?
• What are some of  the social influences on education?
• How have philosophies influenced education? 
• How has sociology influenced education?
• How has psychology as a discipline influenced the learning and instruction process? 
 
T eaching approaches
A variety of  interactive learning approaches will be used in this course. These approaches 
will enhance Student Teachers’ ability to: generate ideas; discuss, ask, and answer 
questions; develop social skills; and analyse and critique readings and discussion topics. 
The learning approaches will contribute to the conceptual development of  the topic 
and enhance the Student Teachers’ ability to evaluate and justify their opinions in an 
informed way . 
COURSE GUIDE:  Foundations of  Education
13
UNIT 1: The ideological foundations of  education
This unit intends to help students understand Islamic ideological perspectives on 
education, as well as the importance of  education for society and individuals in 
the light of  the Quran and the Hadith. The influence of  peace and social justice 
in Islam is considered as they influence the role of  education for all Pakistanis, 
including religious minorities.
Week # T opics/themes
1 The Islamic foundation (objectives) in light of  the Quran and the Hadith
2 The Islamic concept of  peace 
3 The interaction of  other religions with Islam in an Islamic state
The roles and expectations of  the teacher
Understandings to be developed
At the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will understand the following:
 l the Islamic ideological perspectives on education 
 l the influence of  Islamic perspectives on education
 l the role and expectations of  a teacher in light of  the Quran, the Hadith, and   
other religions. 
Essential questions 
• How has the Islamic perspective influenced education, the teacher, and the   
 learner in Pakistan? 
• What do the educational and ideological foundations of  education say about   
 the obligations of  an Islamic state towards its minority members? 
  
Unit 1 assessment performance task 
By keeping a reflective journal, Student Teachers will reflect on their learning from 
the unit and state ways in which this will affect their professional life in this 21st century . 
1
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
14
UNIT 2: The philosophical foundations of  education
This unit deals with the classical and contemporary philosophical perspectives on 
education. It informs Student Teachers about the significant role of  philosophical 
thoughts and their impact on the aims of  education, the selection of  content, 
and the methods of  teaching. The study of  this unit will assist Student Teachers 
in understanding and appreciating the philosophical notions of  good, true, and 
aesthetic knowledge. 
Week # T opics/themes
4 The nature, scope, and function of  the philosophy of  education
The role of  educational philosophy
5 Main philosophical thoughts or schools of  thought
Idealism in education
6 Realism in education
7 Pragmatism in education
Critical philosophical theories in education 
2
Understandings to be developed
At the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will understand the following:
 l explain the nature and scope of  the philosophy of  education
 l analyse the role of  educational philosophy in curriculum planning and   
 development
 l compare and contrast the classical and contemporary educational philosophies  
 and their impact on education
 l interpret the influence of  educational philosophies on intellectual behaviour  
 and approaches to learning
 l give examples that show , in simple terms that knowledge is not free of   
 philosophical underpinnings.
 
Essential questions 
• How have classical and contemporary philosophies influenced your education?
• How have philosophical thoughts influenced the aim, content selection, and  
 instructional practices?
• What evidence do you have of  epistemological, ontological, and axiological  
 knowledge within the content of  your subject area? 
  
Unit 2 assessment performance task 
Student Teachers will analyse and compare any two philosophies and their influence 
on instruction, the school environment, subject matter, and the teacher’s role. They 
will identify and compare the kind of  society the philosophers intend to construct, 
as well as examine the overlaps and differences. Student Teachers will be required 
to analyse and explain epistemological, axiological, and ontological forms of  
knowledge from their subject matter in an essay-type assignment.
COURSE GUIDE:  Foundations of  Education
15
UNIT 3: The sociological foundations of  education
The unit intends to foster an understanding of  how society and culture, social 
structure, history , and economics influence schooling. It will explore the formal 
processes of  education and how education in return strengthens the societal 
culture and its social structure. The unit informs Student Teachers about the three 
different sociological perspectives (functionalist, conflict, and interactionist). This 
will assist them in identifying the kind of  education that prevails in our society .  
Week # T opics/themes
8 The functionalist perspectives on education  
9 The conflict perspectives on education 
10 The interactionist perspectives on education  
3
Understandings to be developed
At the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will understand the following:
 l explain the sociological perspectives on education
 l examine the structures of  Pakistani society
 l infer how social structure and culture influence individual action and vice versa
 l analyse how societal cultures affect schooling and formal education (content   
 formulation). 
Essential questions 
• How have economic, political, and social structures historically influenced   
 education and individual action?
• What relationships historically exist between economic, political, and social   
 structures and how schools, teachers, and learners work?
• How has social change influenced education throughout the history of  education? 
  
Unit 3 assessment performance task 
Student Teachers will prepare a presentation (graphic organizer, poster session, 
PowerPoint, etc.) on how social structure and culture influence individual action, educa-
tion, and schooling and how education in turn influences social structure and culture.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
16
UNIT 4: The psychological foundations of  education
Psychology , as a foundation discipline, has a significant bearing on education 
because of  its influence on the various factors related to teaching, learning, and 
assessment. This unit intends to foster an understanding of  how psychology and 
education are interrelated. It aims to equip Student Teachers with insights into 
student behaviour and learning. They will consider the significant influence of  
psychology on educational objectives, student characteristics, learning processes, 
teaching methods, and evaluation procedures. 
Week # T opics/themes
11
The behaviourist perspective on education
The constructivist perspective on education  
12 The social cognitivist perspective on education
13
The humanist perspective on education
Instruction, learning process, and assessment strategies in light of  the psycholog-
ical perspective  
4
Understandings to be developed
At the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will understand the following:
 l analyse the four psychological perspectives on education, and identify and  
 explain the major features of  each of  the perspectives
 l identify which specific areas of  schooling are addressed by the psychological  
 perspective on education
 l construct an assessment procedure for their own subject area by applying any  
 one of  the perspectives 
 l understand how psychological perspectives influence them to change their  
 instructional strategies for promoting teaching-learning processes. 
Essential questions 
• Which of  the four psychological perspectives are most applicable in today’s  
 classroom situations in Pakistan? 
• What facts and ideas show that these four psychological perspectives on  
 education  are the best guidelines for classroom teaching, learning, and  
 assessment? 
• How would you apply your learning to develop an assessment procedure for  
 your students? 
  
Unit 4 assessment performance task 
Construct an assessment procedure for your students that will represent any one of  
the psychological perspectives, and show how it helps to explain classroom practices. 
COURSE GUIDE:  Foundations of  Education
17
UNIT 5: The historical foundations of  education
The aim of  this unit is to develop an understanding of  the history of  education 
from the time of  the Muslim rulers of  the subcontinent to the current education 
system in Pakistan. The unit unfolds the works of  individuals and organizations 
that provide religious and secular education. It examines the methods and sources 
people used to develop individuals through education. The unit assists Student 
Teachers in thinking critically about their own and others’ assumptions and 
assertions about past education. 
Week # T opics/themes
14
The education system before the British invasion of  the subcontinent
Darul Uloom Deoband
Darul Uloom Nadwat-ul-Ulma 
15 Mohammedan Anglo Oriental College
16
Pakistan’s education system (in light of  education policies)  
• The state of  elementary education
• The state of  secondary education 
• The state of  tertiary education and the role of  the HEC
• The influence of  the 18th amendment on education and thereafter
5
Understandings to be developed
At the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will understand the following:
 l analyse the methods of  teaching, the ways of  learning, and the ways of  grooming  
 the learners from the times of  the Mughals to the end of  the colonial era on the   
 subcontinent 
 l elaborate the major issues that need to be addressed within education because of    
 the 18th amendment 
 l critically compare and analyse the pre-partition education system with the post- 
 partition system of  education.
Essential questions 
• What changes would you make to improve the condition of  education?
• What facts or ideas are evidence that we still strongly hold on to historical   
 practices in education? 
• What is the role of  the HEC in the education system in Pakistan?
• What conclusions can you draw from history to guide our present education   
 system? 
  
Unit 5 assessment performance task 
• Compare and contrast the education system during the Mughal period with   
 the current education system in Pakistan. In your opinion, which system is a   
 better means for human development?  
• Critically analyse the work of  Sir Syed on education. 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
18
Course performance assessment
Student Teachers will demonstrate their knowledge of  the whole course by exploring 
the relationships between the different philosophies of  education, comparing the sim-
ilarities and differences and the coherence between the philosophical, sociological and 
psychological perspectives on education through PowerPoint presentations, written 
assignments, and/or debates. Their performance should also be assessed after each 
unit through quizzes, tests, academic prompts, observations, homework and reflective 
journals. 
T extbooks and references 
The course will draw on textbooks, journal articles, and websites. A list of  these will 
be distributed in class. 
Resources
The following resources may be helpful in choosing appropriate readings. A choice 
of  readings may be included in the syllabus or distributed in class, but include only 
resources that you expect students to use throughout the course. Other readings 
should be distributed as they are needed. Identify specific chapters from recommended 
books.
Canestrari, A. & Marlowe, B. A. (eds.) (2009). Foundations of  education: An anthology of  
critical readings. New York: Sage Publications.
Semel, S. F . (2010). Foundation of  education: The essential text. New York: Routledge. 
Holt, L. C. & Kysilka, M. (2005). Instructional patterns: Strategies for maximizing student 
learning. New York: Sage Publications.
Moore, R. (2004). Education and society: Issues and explanation in the society of  education. 
Cambridge: Cambridge Press.
Sharma, A. (1999). Modern educational technology. New Delhi: Commonwealth Publishers.
• Discuss the position and place of  education in the 18th amendment. In your   
 opinion, what steps need to be taken by the provinces to provide quality   
 education to all their citizens?
• Compare education in different periods and link this with pre-partition and   
 post-partition education in Pakistan. 
COURSE GUIDE:  Foundations of  Education
19
SYLLABUS 2
By
Dr Asif  Khan and Naila Siddiqua
Year/Semester
Year 3, Semester 5
Credit hours
3 credits
Prerequisites
Successful completion of semesters 1–4
Course description
The Foundations of  Education course consists of  disciplines such as sociology , philos-
ophy , psychology , and the history of  education. These disciplines assist in constructing 
the meaning we make of  schools and teaching-learning practices in schools. Schools 
and schooling practices are affected by several factors, including the everyday condi-
tions of  society , prevalent ideologies, current content and pedagogical practices, key 
social issues, and the knowledge and attitudes of  professional educators and other 
participants in schools. Student Teachers will be helped to use and understand the 
relationships between material conditions, ideologies, schooling conditions, curricu-
lum, and pedagogy to address issues that they may face as teachers. This course will 
broaden their thinking on how the characteristics of  the larger community in which 
the school is placed have a direct impact on the school’s conditions, administration, 
curriculum, pedagogy , and assessment practice. One of  the primary aims is to enable 
Student Teachers to establish their own philosophy of  education, first by looking at 
classical, modern, and post-modern philosophies as well as the ideology of  Islam, and 
then by critically reflecting on education today . The course will also provide opportu-
nities to analyse various national educational policies and the historical development 
of  education in Pakistan. 
Course outcomes
At the end of  this course, Student Teachers will be able to do the following: 
• identify the disciplines that constitute the foundations of  education 
• use their understanding of  the relationships between material conditions,   
 ideologies, schooling conditions, curriculum, and pedagogy to address issues   
 that they will face as teachers
• develop a personal philosophy of  life and education
• analyse educational policies and practices in light of  the philosophies of   
 education in Pakistan 
• develop a critical perspective on the challenges of  modern education and   
 teachers’ roles.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
20
Learning and teaching approaches
Learning and teaching approaches will include interactive lectures, discussions with 
accompanying pre-readings, and group activity sessions. The group activities are 
likely to be based around a discussion of  the readings; a focused, structured project; 
fieldwork; and reflections. Student Teachers will be encouraged to do independent 
learning and creative work, through writing reviews of  readings, developing a time-
line of  the historical evolution of  education, and completing projects on Quaid-e-
Azam’s speeches on the type of  society he envisaged for this nation. 
UNIT 1: Introduction to the foundations of  education (2 weeks/6 hours)
The Foundations of  Education course will be introduced through the concept 
of  philosophy , with special reference to its contribution to education. Student 
Teachers need to be aware of  the sources of  the aims of  education. They will 
interpret the relationship between education and philosophy , and discuss the 
historical perspective on schools as institutions and the influences of  society on 
schools and current educators. This unit will assist Student Teachers in exploring 
the relationships between foundational structures and disciplines such as philoso-
phy , sociology , and history , and their impact on instruction.
Week # T opics/themes
1
The purpose of  schooling 
What does it mean to be a teacher? 
The relationship between philosophy and education
2
Three interconnected perspectives on schooling: 
• A historical perspective spanning 250 years of  schooling 
• A sociological perspective that focuses on social structures, current social   
      issues, and social justice
• An authentic, or real-world, perspective based on the views of  current  
     educators
1
COURSE GUIDE:  Foundations of  Education
21
UNIT 2: Philosophical perspectives on education (5 weeks/15 hours)
This unit will provide Student Teachers with an opportunity to understand the 
concept of  education with respect to Islamic and Western philosophical stances. 
The core theme of  Islamic education is explained in light of  the fundamental 
beliefs, purpose of  life, and social structure of  Islamic society . The unit also aims 
to develop their perceptions of  the significant aspects of  Islamic philosophy and 
the contribution of  Muslim philosophers to the field of  education. The Islamic 
philosophy is further juxtaposed with Western philosophers to help Student 
Teachers compare and contrast philosophies on education between the two.
Week # T opics/themes
3
The Islamic perspective on education 
The Last Sermon of  the Holy Prophet, Meesaq-e-Madina
Sources of  knowledge: Quran and Sunnah
4 Al-Ghazali’s educational philosophy (significant aspects)
Ibn-e-Khaldun’s educational philosophy (significant aspects)
5
Allama Iqbal’s educational philosophy (significant aspects)
Quaid-e-Azam’s vision of  education
Ashfaque Ahmed 
6
Socrates 
Plato and the ideal state 
Rousseau and the education of  Emile
7 John Dewey and progressive education
Paulo Freire and social change
8 Midterm examination and presentations
2
UNIT 3: Educational psychology
This unit enables Student Teachers to understand attempts to adjust to a child 
according to individual differences. It highlights the concepts of  learning and 
motivation in order to understand the strategies to address related issues. 
Week # T opics/themes
9 Historical and contemporary views of  learning and motivation
10 Issues and controversies related to psychology as a foundation of  education
3
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
22
UNIT 4: Sociology and philosophy
This unit reviews the concept of  sociology and its determinants, such as culture 
and values. It also provides an opportunity to explore the core idea of  democ-
racy and its relation to education. The role of  the school in social process and 
socio-economic development (through managing human resources) is also 
discussed.
Week # T opics/themes
11
The concept of  society and culture
Educational values
Human resources and professional development
12
Democracy and education
Education and socio-economic development
The role of  the school in social process 
4
UNIT 5: The historical foundations of  education in Pakistan
This last unit focuses on education policies from 1947 to 2009. The issues and 
challenges of  implementing the policies are also included in the discussion. 
Week # T opics/themes
13 Educational policies and practices
14 Issues, challenges, and philosophical questions
15 Final term examination and presentations
16 Final term examination and presentations
5
Course assignments
These will be handed out by the Instructor. 
Grading policy 
A variety of  assessments should be used to review learning by Student Teachers. 
It is recommended that coursework count towards at least 50% of  the final grade. 
Instructors should advise which pieces of  coursework (assignments) will be graded. 
The remainder of  the grade will be determined by mid- and end-of-semester exams. 
Recommended books
Students are expected to use the library . Recommended library books will be  
discussed in class.
COURSE GUIDE:  Foundations of  Education
23
SYLLABUS 3
By
Aslam Komboh
Faculty
Education  
Year/Semester
Year 3, Semester 5
Credit hours
 3 credits
 
Prerequisites
Successful completion of semesters 1–4
Course description
Foundations of  Education is a course designed to explore the relationships between 
foundational disciplines that shape education, such as philosophy , psychology , sociol-
ogy , and history . The knowledge and ideas borrowed from these disciplines influence 
schools and schooling practices, as well as formal processes of  education. During this 
course, the foundations of  schools and schooling as institutions will be traced. Student 
Teachers will be invited to consider questions such as: When there were no schools, 
who educated the generations? Why did this tradition change? 
The forces that affect education need to be revisited and understood so that Student 
Teachers can make informed decisions about the goals of  education, the purpose and 
outcome of  education, and how the generations should be educated to perform a 
more active citizenship role. 
Educational psychology as a foundation of  education will not be treated as a body 
of  knowledge, but as a lens through which Student Teachers can critically review the 
teaching-learning process. Learning theory tells us to teach children as individuals 
who learn in their own unique manner. ‘The finest possible curriculum is precisely the 
one that starts with each child’s singular means of  learning. Instruction and guidance 
are best provided by those with an intimate understanding of  the individual child 
and a deep commitment to the child’s education’ (Guterson, 1992). The forces that 
shape education are: comparative developments in education by the international 
community; international citizenship requirements; education philosophies having 
psychological and sociological colour; national ideology projected through pre- and 
post-independence indigenous educational movements; and socio-politico-economic 
conditions of  the country reflected through the various national policy documents on 
education.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
24
Student Teachers will have an opportunity to apply what they learn in the course 
through critical inquiry into questions such as:
• Who is the learner in the education set-up?
• Who is the teacher responsible to teach this learner?
• What kinds of  learning experiences will be provided to learners to help them   
 become constructive, critical, and active citizens?
• What are some of  the social influences on education (home, peers, community ,  
 and religious scholars)? 
Course outcomes
At the end of  this course, Student Teachers will  be able to do the following: 
• analyse education and schooling through the lenses of  different foundational   
 forces
• apply foundational knowledge in the development their own education theory  
 and practice 
• analyse the history of  education and the educational system in general and in  
 the Pakistani context in particular 
• review philosophical schools of  thought, such as realism, idealism, pragmatism,  
 essentialism, and existentialism, and their impact on curriculum, teaching and  
 learning, and teacher and learner 
• understand Pakistani education scenarios through considering demography   
 and socio-economic structures. 
Learning and teaching approaches
The course will utilize a variety of  teaching and learning approaches to engage Student 
Teachers in active learning, for example:
• Self-study , based on skim-reading resources and developing their own narrative  
 of  the study 
• Group discussion to promote group dynamics and collective thinking
• Assignments, projects, and presentations for sharing creative, interpretive   
 understanding
• Debates to promote daring and reflective questioning and understand divergent  
 views 
• Interactive lectures to give needed information and, where necessary , check for  
 understanding 
• Buzz groups to engage Student Teachers in the learning process 
 
COURSE GUIDE:  Foundations of  Education
25
UNIT 1: Introduction to the foundations of  education 
This unit will start by considering whether education is a process or a product, as well as the definition of  
education. It will then examine educational systems, both traditional and progressive, and their contribu-
tion to the betterment of  society . Global educational issues that are experienced in Pakistan will be part 
of  the unit. A very cautious approach will be taken, bearing in mind that Student Teachers have to see 
their role in school and connect it with the larger society in which these schools are embedded. Student 
Teachers will be invited to broaden narrow conceptions of  the role of  education as the delivery of  a 
packaged programme to a conception of  education that has the teacher identifying unique and compli-
cated problems and situations and creating original solutions.
Unit 1 learning outcomes
At the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l discuss the concept of education
 l review the historical movement and systems of education
 l recognize the role of teachers as ‘border crossers’ and not mere knowledge   
 d ispensers
 l reflect on different issues and challenges encountered through education as an  
 i nstitutionalized system.
Weeks 1–3 content
• The meaning of education, various concepts and definitions 
• Education as a system: meaning, definition, and various historical systems of  
 ed ucation 
• Foundations of education to broaden teachers’ roles and conceptions of education 
• Potential problems, issues, and trends in education as an institutionalized system
UNIT 2: The historical foundations of  education 
This unit seeks to provide Student Teachers with some methodological and theoretical training in histor-
ical research, so that they acquire and can advance a deep understanding of  the origins and development 
of  education within the global context and also within Pakistan. They will be challenged to appreciate 
the development of  the social and intellectual history of  education that has perpetuated social injustice, 
as well as how political, economic, social, and educational systems contribute to the reproduction of  
inequality . In order to make inferences, the subcontinental and post-independence periods of  education 
will be explored. 
1
2
Unit 2 learning outcomes
At the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l trace the educational history (of the subcontinent) before, during, and after partition 
 l discuss the multiple pathways to education as practised in Pakistan
 l discuss the challenges faced by Pakistan in enhancing educational standards   
 a nd quality. 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
26
3
Weeks 4–6 content
• The indigenous system of education: an analysis against the backdrop of
various foundations
• Pre-independence developments and challenges in education
• Post-independence developments and challenges in education
• The emergence of the existing education system and the forces that caused it
UNIT 3: The philosophical development of  education: Major schools of  thought 
and their implications for education
This unit provides Student Teachers with a comparative analysis of  philosophical schools of  thought. 
The purpose is to foster an understanding of  different philosophies and how they affect education. A 
comparison of  different schools will assist Student Teachers in developing the capacity to engage in 
an effective discussion of  theoretical problems in education, especially educational justice, peace, and 
democracy . They will learn that good thinkers and doers borrow great ideas from different schools of  
thought and develop an eclectic philosophy . 
Unit 3 learning outcomes
At the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l compare and contrast different schools of thought that inform educational 
aims and principles 
 l review each school of thought to gain knowledge
 l recognize the significance of philosophical knowledge and the need to be 
logical and reasonable in making arguments and decisions
 l construct a personal philosophy of education.
Weeks 7–10 content
• Perennialism
• Essentialism
• Progressivism
• Reconstructionism
• An eclectic philosophy
• The role of  teachers in drawing ideas from different schools of  thought
COURSE GUIDE:  Foundations of  Education
27
UNIT 4: Demography and the cultures of  Pakistan that shape education
In this unit, Student Teachers will be helped to appreciate that every society is a blend of  cultures, ethnicity , 
and religious beliefs and practices. Every society experiences political and socio-economic trends and 
development. Education is neither neutral nor free from all these forces – they influence it. Thus we need 
to understand the connection between these forces and education in order to work around them, rather 
than in isolation. As the saying goes, ‘ All evils are because of  education and all evils of  society can be 
eradicated by education’. Hence, understanding Pakistan’s demography from different perspectives will 
be the main purpose of  this unit. 
Unit 4 learning outcomes
At the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l appreciate the multiple cultures and diversity in the Pakistani nation that lead  
 t o diverging expectations of and demands on education
 l acknowledge political instability and its impact on education
 l rethink ways of inclusion and exclusion: gender, ethnicity, language, and   
 e conomic stratification. 
Weeks 11–12 content
• Cultural similarities and dissimilarities among various regions  
• Pakistani ideology and its diverging interpretations 
• Socio-economic parity and disparity among various regions
• The sociopolitical conditions of the country
UNIT 5: The education and psychology nexus 
Educational psychologists have studied cognition, instruction, learning, motivation, individual differences, 
and the measurement of  human abilities, to name just a few areas that relate to education and schooling. 
Of  all these, perhaps the study of  learning is the most closely associated with education. Different theories 
of  learning have had different impacts on education and have supported different practices. In this unit, 
educational psychology will not be introduced, but Student Teachers will build on their learning from the 
course on educational psychology and look for responses to these questions: 
• How are different approaches to psychology supported by different philosophies of  education? 
• What is a useful and appropriate balance of  discovery and direct instruction? 
• How can teachers, who must work with groups, adapt instruction to individual needs? 
• What should be the role of  testing and grading in education? 
• What are the goals of  education and how do instructors balance cognitive, affective, and psycho   
      motor objectives? 
• How can technologies be used to their best advantage for students? 
• How can teachers help students understand, remember, and apply knowledge? 
4
5
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
28
Unit 5 learning outcomes
At the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l identify the philosophical underpinnings of different branches of psychology
 l appreciate the role of educational psychology in preparing them to be better   
 t eachers 
 l compare psychological theories to borrow ideas on learning 
 l put into practice knowledge of educational psychology, with specific attention  
 t o motivation. 
Weeks 13–14 content
• Revisiting theories of learning: behaviourism and cognitivism 
• Learning and motivation: teacher and students 
• Disparity between cooperative, collaborative, and individual learning, and   
 r ewarding individual testing and evaluation
• Curriculum focus on knowledge at the cost of affective and psycho-motor skills
• Technologies: a blessing or a curse?
UNIT 6: The education and psychology nexus 
The sociology of  education explores the school–society/educational–cultural interface: how socio-cultural 
forces define the limits and possibilities of  schooling and how education affects society . Of  particular inter-
est will be understanding how social institutions produce injustice and justice; the nature and dynamics of  
social stratification; an understanding of  the dynamics of  racial, gendered, and ethnic discrimination; and 
the nature and development of  a pluralistic democratic culture.
Unit 6 learning outcomes
At the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l observe connections between the school and society at large 
 l discuss specific societal issues that affect schools and schooling practices 
 l design or construct strategies to deal with pertinent social issues that affect  
 t he teaching-learning processes.
Weeks 15–16 content
• Academic freedom: an ideal and challenge 
• Education and public responsibility
• Parental aspirations 
• Media influences 
• Gender disparity 
6
COURSE GUIDE:  Foundations of  Education
29
Readings
Student Teachers will be expected to do a variety of  readings from the library and 
from those resources provided by the Instructor. 
Resources
The following web-based resources may be helpful in choosing appropriate readings. 
Your list of  chosen readings may be included in the syllabus or distributed in class. 
However, include only those resources that you expect students to use throughout the 
course. Other readings should be distributed as needed.
Siddiqui, B. H. (n.d.) Evolution of  philosophical activity in Pakistan. Retrieved from
 Ø http://www .allamaiqbal.com/publications/journals/review/apr89/9.htm
Dewey , J. (1897). My pedagogic creed. School Journal, 54, 77–80. Retrieved from
 Ø http://dewey .pragmatism.org/creed.htm
Book review: Saiyidain, K. G. (1977). Iqbal’s educational philosophy. Retrieved from
 Ø http://education5.net/i/iqbal%E2%80%99s-educational-philosophy-e757
Interview with Dr Ashfaque Ahmad. Retrieved from 
 Ø http://www .afed.itacec.org/document/aziz_kabani_and_somaiya_ayoob.pdf
Freire, P . (1993). Pedagogy of  the oppressed. Chapter 2. New York: Continuum Books. 
Retrieved from 
 Ø http://www .webster.edu/~corbetre/philosophy/education/freire/freire-2.html
Boeree, C. G. (2000). The Ancient Greeks, Part Two: Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle. 
Retrieved from
 Ø http://webspace.ship.edu/cgboer/athenians.html
References
Guterson, D. (1992). Family matters: Why homeschooling makes sense. New York: 
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 
 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
30
SYLLABUS 4
By
Izaz Ali and Dr Muhammad Nauman
Faculty
Education  
Year/Semester
Year 3, Semester 5
Credit hours
3 credits (48 class hours)
 
Prerequisites
Successful completion of semesters 1–4
Course description
The purpose of  this course is to reflect on the philosophical, sociological, psychological, 
ideological, and historical foundations of  education. This course will highlight the 
basic concepts about education and will enhance the thinking abilities of  Student 
Teachers. The main focus of  this course is on how the philosophies of  great educators 
in the East and West have contributed to reframing education. This course is designed 
to cover the conventional, social, and cultural paradigms, along with the current issues 
and problems of  the established system of  education. The Foundation of  Education 
course has a practical and intellectual interest for Student Teachers. 
Learning outcomes
This course will enable Student Teachers to do the following:
• understand the basic purpose of  education from the social, political, historical,  
 economic, psychological, and philosophical perspectives
• relate philosophy to education
• highlight the role of  Western and Eastern philosophers in education
• trace the historical development of  education
• analyse the prevailing issues and problems of  education from the disciplines   
 that constitute the foundations of  education
COURSE GUIDE:  Foundations of  Education
31
Learning and teaching approaches
Teaching and learning of  the course will be through a student-centred approach. 
Different interactive strategies, such as group discussions, presentations, and assignments 
will be applied to promote creativity . Independent learning will also be encouraged 
through class assignments. The course readings will be provided to students at the 
start of  the course to inculcate the habit of  reading. This will also help to raise the 
level of  in-class discussion and make the course more dynamic.
 
UNIT 1: Philosophy of  education
Education modifies human behaviour in multiple ways. The Foundations of 
Education course will expand Student Teachers’ scope of  understanding. In 
this unit, they will be introduced to the very meaning and basic concepts of 
education. Education will also be related to philosophy in order to further widen 
the scope. 
Week # T opics/themes
1
Introduction to the course
The meaning and definitions of  education
The meaning and definitions of  philosophy
2
The relationship between education and philosophy
The scope and importance of  education and philosophy
The aims of  education
1
Duration: 2 weeks (6 hours)
Unit 1 learning objectives
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l describe and explain education and philosophy 
 l explain the scope and importance of  education and philosophy
 l identify the major functions of  education and philosophy 
 l relate education to philosophy . 
T eaching methodology
The teaching methodology will include the following:
• Interactive lectures
• Question and answer sessions
• Discussions
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
32
UNIT 2: The foundations of  education
This unit will explain how education is affected by philosophy , sociology , psychol-
ogy , ideology , and religion. It will also highlight the role of  education in shaping 
attitudes and framing policies. The unit will stir the whole human mind in order 
to expand Student Teachers’ views on education.
Week # T opics/themes
3
Compare the philosophical and ideological foundations of  education
The sociological foundations of  education
The psychological foundations of  education
4
Ideology versus religion 
The ideological foundations of  education
The Islamic foundations of  education  
2
Duration: 2 weeks (6 hours)
Unit 2 learning objectives
After completing this unit, Students Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l describe and explain various foundations of  education 
 l differentiate among the philosophical, sociological, psychological, ideological,  
 and r eligious  
      foundations of  education
 l explain the roles of  the teacher, the learner, and the curriculum of  all these  
 f oundations
 l understand the pedagogical skills used in all these foundations. 
T eaching methodology
The teaching methodology will include the following:
• Interactive lectures
• Question and answer sessions
• Group discussions
COURSE GUIDE:  Foundations of  Education
33
UNIT 3:                                                                         The history of  education     
This unit will enable Student Teachers to investigate and trace the roots of  
education in both the Western and the Muslim world. The role played by great 
scholars will be analysed and their particular ‘ism’ will be assessed. Similarly , the 
contribution of  Muslim educationists will be highlighted, with reference to their 
views on education.  
Week # T opics/themes
5
What is idealism?
Plato as the major exponent of  idealism
The application of  idealism in education
6
Aristotle as an educationist
What is realism?
The application of  realism in education
7
What is naturalism?
Rousseau’s views on naturalism
The application of  naturalism in education
8
What is pragmatism?
Ibn-e-Khaldun’s views on education
Applications of  pragmatism in education
9
Iqbal as an educationist
The contribution of  Iqbal’s poetry to education
Iqbal’s views on the teacher, the curriculum, and pedagogy
10
Western scholars’ views on education
Muslim scholars’ views on education
Comparison of  Western and Muslim scholars
3
Duration: 6 weeks (18 hours)
Unit 3 learning objectives
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l describe and explain the views of  Western scholars on education
 l describe and explain the views of  Muslim scholars on education
 l understand idealism, realism, and naturalism
 l learn the views of  Al-Ghazali, Ibn-e-Khaldun and Allama Iqbal on education. 
T eaching methodology
The teaching methodology will include the following:
• Interactive lectures
• Question and answer sessions
• Discussions
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
34
UNIT 4:                                                                      Islamic perspectives on education      
This unit will enhance Student Teachers’ cognitive perception of  various allusions 
to and emphases on education in the Quran and the Hadith. The method of  
teaching of  our Holy Prophet will be explained in the Islamic way and the idea 
of  brotherhood will be discussed in light of  the Last Sermon. The unit will also 
explain how students’ moral reasoning and behaviour change over time and what 
teachers can do to promote moral development. 
Week # T opics/themes
11
Explanation of  Surah Al-Alaq
The emphasis on the acquisition of  education in the Quran
The emphasis on the acquisition of  education in the Hadith
12
Meesaq-e Medina (Medina Charter): the foundation stone of  education 
The Last Sermon: text relevancy with education
A critical analysis of  the Last Sermon
13
As-Suffa: the first institute in Islam
The method of  teaching in As-Suffa
The curriculum of  the As-Suffa Institute
4
Duration: 3 weeks (9 hours)
Unit 4 learning objectives
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l identify the impact of  the Quran and the Hadith on the early social  
 de velopment of  the child
 l assess the role of  the Quran and the Hadith in education
 l analyse the history of  Islam in light of  the Quran
 l discuss the moral and ethical values discussed in the Quran and the Hadith. 
T eaching methodology
The teaching methodology will include the following:
• Interactive lectures
• Question and answer sessions
• Discussions
COURSE GUIDE:  Foundations of  Education
35
UNIT 5:                                                                  Education reports and policies    
In the history of  Pakistan, several changes have been made to our education 
system. This unit focuses on the relevant reports and other policies behind these 
changes. There is often a sizeable gap between theory and practice in our country . 
Student Teachers may not be aware of  these changes, so this unit will clarify 
their concepts about changes in education. The significant role of  government in 
improving education in Pakistan will also be highlighted. 
Week # T opics/themes
14
The difference between the reports and policies
How are the reports and policies framed?
How are the reports and policies launched and applied?
15
Factors that hinder the application of  the reports and policies
The main points of  the Sharif  Commission 
A critical review of  the 1978–80 policy
16
The main points of  the 1998–2010 policy
An analysis of  the 1998–2010 policy 
Is there any need for a new policy?
5
Duration: 3 weeks (9 hours)
Learning objectives
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l give their views on the various reports and policies on education
 l assess the government’s role and policy on education
 l analyse the budget allocation to education.
T eaching methodology
The teaching methodology will include the following:
• Interactive lectures
• Question and answer sessions
• Discussions
T extbooks and references 
The course will draw on textbooks, journal articles, and websites. A list of  these will 
be distributed in class. 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
36
Resources
The following resources may be helpful in choosing appropriate readings. Your list 
of  chosen readings may be included in the syllabus or distributed in class. However, 
it should include only those resources that you expect students to use throughout the 
course. Other readings should be distributed as needed.
Canestrari, A. & Marlowe, B. A. (eds.) (2009). Foundations of  education: An anthology of  
critical readings. New York: Sage Publications.
Goldblatt, P . F . & Smith, D. (eds.) (2005). Cases for teacher development: Preparing for the 
classroom. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
Holt, L. C. & Kysilka, M. (2005). Instructional patterns: Strategies for maximizing student 
learning. New York: Sage Publications.
Murphy , D. (2005). Foundations: Introduction to Teaching. New York: Prentice Hall. 
Provenzo, E. F . (2005). Critical issues in education: An anthology of  reading. New York: 
Sage Publications. 
Semel, S. F . (2010). Foundations of  education: The essential texts. Oxford: Routledge.
Representative 
syllabi with 
teaching notes
3
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
38
This section contains two syllabi, each with accompanying teaching notes. The 
Integrated Teaching Notes section offers additional notes that have been integrated 
using broad themes addressed in the course. Faculty who are teaching the course for 
the first time or who are interested the process of  curriculum design may find it useful 
to see how the authors of  these representative syllabi chose to develop particular ideas 
and themes in their notes. (Ideas presented here are not duplicated in the Integrated 
Teaching Notes, where integrated themes may be found.)
REPRESENTATIVE SYLLABUS 1 
By
Dr Muhammad Shahid Farooq, Allah Noor and Dr Amtul Hafeez
Course title  
Foundations of Education
Credit hours 
3 hours
Year/semester   
Year 3, Semester 5
Description 
The broad goal of  this course is to enable the Student Teachers to familiarize them-
selves with the basic underlying assumptions, policies, and practices of  education as 
we know it today . It elaborates on the foundations of  education by comparing and 
contrasting educational issues of  the past with those of  today . The emphasis will be 
on analysing the various sociological, political, economic, and ideological forces that 
influence the process of  education in our culture and global context. These concepts 
will not only enable Student Teachers to comprehend the current practices, policies, 
and challenges of  the education sector in Pakistan, but will also provide them with 
the opportunity to improve their problem-solving skills. Student Teachers will be 
challenged to interpret knowledge within its historical, philosophical, ideological, 
and social contexts, which will contribute to critical perspectives on education, both 
within and outside of  schools.
Course outcomes
After this course, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
• explain the historical, philosophical, ideological, and social contexts of   
 education in the national and global contexts
• identify the Islamic sources (Quran and Hadith) of  education in Pakistan
• compare and contrast a range of  psychological, social, philosophical, and   
 economic factors of  education
• elaborate on the historical progression of  the education system in Pakistan
• discuss the local and global challenges and prospects of  education.
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
39
UNIT 1: The purpose of  education
This unit will enable Student Teachers to understand the con-
cept of  education and its nature and scope. It will help them 
not only to implement their knowledge of  the foundations of  
education, but also to understand how different philosophical 
theories affect our education. The unit will also help them 
build their critical, analytical, and creative thinking skills.
Week # Session # T opics/themes
1 Session 1 Definitions of  education
Session 2 The aims of  education
Session 3 The nature and scope of  education
2 Session 1 Education as a social change agent
Session 2 The elements of  education
Session 3 Education and society
3 Session 1 Education and the cultural heritage
Session 2 Education and self-realization
Session 3 Education and social adjustment
4 Session 1 Different theorists and education
Session 2 a. Muslims
Session 3 b. Idealists and realists
5 Session 1 c. Essentialists
Session 2 d. Progressivists
Session 3 e. Reconstructionists
1
Outcomes
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l explain the term education, including its nature and scope
 l criticize the different philosophical thoughts and contributions of  various   
 educationists 
 l propound their own philosophy of  education.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
40
UNIT 2: The state of  education in Pakistan
This unit will inform Student Teachers about the religious, 
social, political, economic, and psychological conditions of  
education in Pakistan. It will enable them to differentiate 
the periods of  education, pre-Pakistan and beyond. Student 
Teachers will confront the underlying assumptions and 
contextual factors of  various challenges to education in 
Pakistan. This unit will assist them in examining the work of  
our leaders, showing their positive and negative contributions 
to the education sector. 
Week # Session # T opics/themes
6 Session 1 Religious conditions and education
Session 2 Social conditions and education
Session 3 Economic conditions and education
7 Session 1 Political conditions and education
Session 2 Psychological conditions and education
Session 3 Historical perspective on education in Pakistan
a. Pre-Pakistan period
8 Session 1 b. Period from 1947–1971
Session 2 c. Period from 1972–2000
Session 3 d. Period from 2001 to date
9 Session 1 Midterm exam
Session 2 e. National Policy for Persons with Disabilities, 2002
Session 3 f. National Education Policy , 2009
2
Outcomes
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l identify the religious, social, political, economic, and psychological conditions   
 of  education in Pakistan
 l reflect upon the historical progression of  the education system in Pakistan
 l identify the foundations of  Pakistani education.
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
41
UNIT 3: Practices of  education
This unit will enable Student Teachers to learn about the dif-
ferent practices of  education and their roots in the foundations 
of  education. Critical issues that Student Teachers will face in 
school will be analysed.
Week # Session # T opics/themes
10 Session 1 Introduction to various education practices in the country
Session 2 Connecting practices to educational foundations
Session 3 Education as a business activity: economic and political 
foundations
11 Session 1 Education and globalization: sociological, economic, and politi-
cal foundations
Session 2 Special education: social, cultural, and political foundations
Session 3 Community and culture as a reflection of  ideological foundations
Outcomes
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l grasp the different education practices in the country and how they have been   
 influenced b y one or more foundations of  education
 l identify issues faced in classrooms that can be addressed through a better   
 under standing of  the foundations of  education.
UNIT 4: Challenges and prospects of  education in Pakistan
This unit will enable Student Teachers to use the foundations of  
education as a critical lens through which to examine the chal-
lenges facing education in Pakistan. Important issues such as the 
efforts towards the Islamic interpretation of  education, improving 
the literacy situation, and the causes of  the low literacy rate and 
high dropout rate will be discussed. The unit will look at the teacher’s 
role in providing education to all segments of  society , irrespective 
of  age, gender, religion, and class, through the interrelated histor-
ical, philosophical, and socio-cultural dimensions of  education. 
Week # Session # T opics/themes
12 Session 1 a. T he Islamization of  education
Session 2 b. Lo w literacy rates
Session 3 c. High dropout r ates
13 Session 1 d. P oor implementation and continuation of  national policies
Session 2 e. Gender disparity in education
Session 3 f. P olitical involvement 
3
4
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
42
UNIT 4: Challenges and prospects of  education in Pakistan
Week # Session # T opics/themes
14 Session 1 g. P oor conditions of  schools
Session 2 h. Se gregation in the education system
Session 3 i. P oor teacher training
15 Session 1 j. T he role of  teachers in nation-building
Session 2 k. T eacher training to address individual differences
Session 3 l. T he move against corruption
16 Session 1 m. School for all
Session 2 n. Pri vate schooling
Session 3 Final term exam 
4
Outcomes
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l identify the problems and issues in contemporary education 
 l identify the historical, socio-cultural, philosophical, ideological, and political   
 f oundations of  those problems and issues.
Books and references
Student Teachers will be expected to do a variety of  readings from the library and 
from resources provided by the Instructor.
T eaching strategies
A range of  teaching strategies will be adopted to enhance learning. These will vary 
according to the demand of  the topic. Active learning strategies, such as group 
discussion, will be used.
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
43
Assessment 
Various types of  assessments will be used:
• A topic will be assigned to Student Teachers to read and write a brief  critique   
 to be shared with classmates for further refinement
• Group and individual assignments on inclusive education will be given to be   
 marked and graded
• Some topics will be selected for PowerPoint presentations to be made before   
 the class
• Charts (posters) will be written on completion on selected topics
• Quiz competition
• Midterm exam
• Final term exam
Grading policy 
First assignment:  10%
Second assignment: 10%
Quiz:   05%
Midterm exam:   35%
Final term exam:  40%
T otal:    100%
 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
44
T eaching notes: Representative syllabus 1
Unit 1: Purpose of education – Week 1: Session 1
Topics
• Introduction to the course
• The definitions of  education 
Learning outcomes 
After this session, Students Teachers will be able to: 
l analyse different definitions of  education 
l formulate their own definition of  education. 
Resources 
Chart for classroom and handouts for Student Teachers. 
Instructions, activities and strategies
Introduction (5–10 min)
Introduce the course to the Student Teachers. Write the word education in the middle 
of  the blackboard or flipchart and let Student Teachers brainstorm. Ask them to 
create simplified and then complex definitions of  education while brainstorming in 
groups.
Development of the lesson (40–45 min)
Interactive lecture: Write the topic and subtopic of  the lecture on the board. Draw 
the table below on the board (or make a handout and distribute it to the Student 
Teachers) and tell them to fill it in while they are listening to the lecture.
Definition of  
education
Main points 
(Write down the main points of  the definition of   
education while listening to the lecture.)
Education in Islam (as 
given in the Quran 
and the Hadith)
Education in the 21st 
century
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
45
Lecture notes 
What is education? 
The definition of  education in common usage ‘is merely the delivery of  knowledge, 
skills and information from teachers to students’, but does not encompass the impor-
tance of  being or becoming educated. The proper definition of  education is ‘the 
process of  becoming an educated person’. Being an educated person means you are 
capable of  being reflective at all times, in different situations. You are able to think 
accurately , showing the right gestures and acting effectively to achieve self-selected 
goals and aspirations. Education is a process of  cognitive cartography , chalking up 
your experiences and guiding yourself  to a variety of  possible courses to reach optimal 
states when you find yourself  in non-optimal states. (See Don Berg, www .teach-kids-
attitude-1st.com/definition-of-education.html)
See also: http://freeonlineeducation4all.com/archives/35 An excerpt from the Berg 
website that would be suitable as a student reading is given in the Resources section at 
the end of  this document.
Definition of education 
George F . Kneller: ‘In its broad sense, education refers to any act or experience that 
has a formative effect on the mind, character, or physical ability of  an individual … In 
its technical sense education is the process by which society , through schools, colleges, 
universities, and other institutions, deliberately transmits its cultural heritage–its 
accumulated knowledge, values, and skills–from one generation to another.’ (Kneller, 
G. F . (1971). Introduction to the philosophy of  education. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 
pp. 20–21.) See also: 
 Ø http://everything.explained.at/Education/
Pestalozzi: ‘Education is a natural, harmonious and progressive development of  man’s 
innate powers.’ Education inculcates certain values and principles and also prepares a 
human being for social life.
Education in Islam
To seek knowledge is a sacred duty; it is obligatory for every Muslim, male and female. 
The first Quranic word revealed was ‘Iqra’ – Read! Seek knowledge! Educate your-
selves! Be educated. Surat Az-Zumar, ayat 9 reveals: ‘ Are those equal, those who know 
and those who do not know?’ Surah Al-Baqarah, ayat 269 reveals: ‘ Allah grants wisdom 
to whom He pleases and to whom wisdom is granted indeed he receives an overflow-
ing benefit.’ See: http://www .islamawareness.net/Education/importance.html – this 
website includes additional material suitable for student reading or in preparation of  
class notes.
The Prophet of  Islam (peace be upon him and his progeny) also emphasized the 
importance of  seeking knowledge in different ways:
(a) Time: ‘Seek knowledge from the cradle to the grave.’
(b) Place: ‘Seek knowledge even if  it is far as China.’
(c) Gender: ‘Seeking of  knowledge is a duty of  every Muslim.’
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
46
Education in the 21st century 
‘ As the 21st century continues to grow of  age, the world is becoming more intercon-
nected and complex, and craving more for the knowledge of  intellectual property . 
In this environment, it is critical that we shift our focus from temporary results of  
education to life-long learning. Fortunately , the increasing availability of  learning 
resources on the internet is coinciding with the growing importance of  continuous 
learning.  If  we are willing to view learning from a new perspective, we are no longer 
resource-constrained.’ Concepts are being presented globally . It is at this point ‘that 
most innovation occurs and where we can discern patterns that indicate new kinds of  
opportunities and challenges. It is at the edge can mean many things: kids who grow 
up digital, second-tier and for-profit teaching institutions, developments in rapidly 
changing nations.’ John Seely Brown, retrieved from
 Ø http://www .johnseelybrown.com/newlearning.pdf
Conclusion (5 min)
Summarize: Ask Student Teachers to analyse their own definitions (which they have 
propounded during the brainstorming session) after the lecture, using the completed 
table. They can make changes to their own definitions on the basis of  the lecture. 
Assessment 
While giving comparisons about the topic, walk around the room and observe the 
Student Teachers. 
Definition of education 
The definition of  education in common usage, that education is merely the delivery of  
knowledge, skills, and information from teachers to students, is inadequate to capture 
what is really important about being and becoming educated. The proper definition of  
education is the process of  becoming an educated person. See: 
 Ø http://www .all2one.in/Education.aspx
The website challenges the accountability movement with a literal interpretation of  
accountability , as it separates knowledge into discrete units to be measured. ‘This is 
the same kind of  literalism that causes absurd behaviour in religious communities, 
too. (At least, in education the fundamentalists are only fiscally killing their enemies 
and not literally .)’ 
It goes on to discuss problems with education as ‘delivery’ and offers a definition of  
education as ‘a process of  cognitive cartography .’ The article would be an appropriate 
reading assignment for Student Teachers. 
 } Week 1: Session 2
T opic
The aims of  education
Learning outcome
After this session, Student Teachers will be able to identify the aims of  education.
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
47
Resources 
Chart for classroom and handouts for Student Teachers. 
Instructions, activities and strategies 
Introduction (5 min)
Brainstorming: Write the phrase ‘The aims of  education’ on the board or flip chart. 
Ask the Student Teachers what comes to mind when they hear this phrase. Write 
down their initial views on the aims of  education.
Development of the lesson (20–25 min)
Reading: Divide the Student Teachers into six groups. There are three articles on the 
aims of  education. Distribute them to the groups. Three sets of  two groups each will 
get the same article. Tell the groups to read the articles. (This may be more appropriate 
as a homework assignment prior to the session.)
Article 1: Suppes, P . (1996). The aims of  education. Retrieved from
 Ø http://suppes-corpus.stanford.edu/articles/comped/340.pdf
Article 2: Ashraf, S. A. (n.d.). The aims of  education. Retrieved from
 Ø http://www .cambridgemuslimcollege.org/Papers/CMC%20Papers%202%20-%20 
 Education%20by%20SAAshraf.pdf
Article 3: Zainulabideen, Z. (n.d.). A critical review of  the aims of  education in 
western tradition. Retrieved from 
 Ø http://www .ips.org.pk/education/1111-a-critical-review-of-the-aims-of-education- 
 in-the-western-tradition-.html
Discussion (20 min)
Groups discuss their articles, focusing on the following guiding questions:
1) What are the aims of  education in the author’s view?
2) What are the arguments (philosophical thoughts) on which the aims of   
 education are based? 
3) Which ideas (if  any) in the article would you challenge or disagree with?
Instruct the group to write the main points of  their answers on a flip chart and display 
them on the board or classroom wall. Organize a gallery walk, during which Student 
Teachers walk around the class and read each other’s charts.
Conclusion (10 min)
Bring back the brainstorming points that were developed at the beginning of  the 
lesson and ask Student Teachers to look at their points. Allow them to change, add to, 
or extend their ideas.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
48
 } Week 1, Session 3
T opic 
The nature and scope of  education
Prepare a presentation for the session, using an excerpt from an article Meaning, 
Nature and Aims of  Education by John Parankimalil available at 
 Ø http://johnparankimalil.wordpress.com/2012/03/26/meaning-nature- 
 and-aims-of-education/
Some of  the opinions presented are controversial. Ensure that Student Teachers 
understand that they are opinions and allow sufficient time for discussion.
The nature of education 
• Education is lifelong process because every stage of  an individual’s life is   
 important from an educational perspective. 
• Education is a systematic process; it transacts its activities through a systematic  
 institution and regulation. 
• Education is the development of  the individual and society . It is called a force   
 for social development, which can improve every aspect of  society . 
• Education is the modification of  behaviour; human behaviour is modified and  
 improved through the educational process. 
• Education is training. The human senses, mind, behaviour, activities, and skills  
 are trained in a constructive and socially desirable way . 
• Education is instruction and direction. It directs and instructs an individual to  
 fulfill his desires and needs for exaltation of  his whole personality . 
• Education is life. Life without education is meaningless and like the life of  a   
 beast. Every aspect and incident needs education for its sound development. 
• Education is a continuous reconstruction of  our experiences. As per the   
 definition of  John Dewey , education reconstructs and remodels our experiences  
 in a socially desirable way .
 } Week 2: Session 1 
T opic
Education as a social change agent 
Learning outcomes 
After this unit, Students Teachers will be able to do the following: 
 l define the term social change
 l identify the relationship between education and social change 
 l describe education as a social change.
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
49
Instructions, activities and strategies 
Inquiry (35–40 min)
Inform the Student Teachers that they will conduct an inquiry on this topic. You 
can give an inquiry task during the previous session. Let them form groups to find 
answers to the following questions:
• What is social change?
• What is the relationship between education and social change?
• How can education be an agent of  social change?
Whole-class discussion (20–25 min)
Conduct a whole-class discussion on the basis of  the Student Teachers’ inquiry 
information. Use the inquiry questions for a guided discussion. You can select any one 
of  the Student Teachers to moderate the discussion.
The following resources may be helpful: Rauf, A. Social change and education: An 
overview . 
 Ø http://www .scribd.com/doc/25839368/Social-Change-and-Education-in-Pakistan
 } Week 2: Session 2 
T opics
• The aims of  education
• Education for vocational preparation
• Education for individual development
• Islamic aims of  education
• Modern aims of  education 
Learning outcome
After this session, Student Teachers will be able to differentiate the general, Islamic, 
and modern aims of  education, education for vocational preparation, and education 
for individual development.
Instructions, activities and strategies 
Introduction (5–10 min)
The aim of  education in contemporary society is to foster the individual’s inner free-
dom and development towards self-initiated action, so that everyone accepts respon-
sibility for their own actions. Through education, the individual is able to self-direct, 
make intelligent decisions, criticize positively , and evaluate others. He pursues the 
acquisition of  knowledge to resolve his problems. She adapts flexibly to new situations 
by utilizing her experiences in new situations in a creative manner. He cooperates 
with others, and is self-motivated and desirous to work to suit his own purposes.
Resources 
Chart for classroom and handouts for Student Teachers. 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
50
Development of the lesson (40–45 min)
Interactive lecture: Write the topic and subtopic of  the lecture on the board. Draw 
this table on the board (or you can make a handout and distribute it to the Student 
Teachers) and tell them to fill it in while they are listening to the lecture.
Definition of  
education
Main points 
(Write down the main points of  the definition of   
education while listening to the lecture.)
The aims of  education
Education for  
vocational preparation
Education for individual 
development
The Islamic aims of  
education
The modern aims of  
education
Talk about the aims of  education according to these categories. Notes to use in 
preparing an interactive lecture are provided below . (Interactive lecture, as a strategy , 
is explained in the section of  this document titled Methods and Strategies to Use in 
Planning.) 
Notes for preparing an interactive lecture 
Aims of education
Education for intellectual attainment: To develop a learner’s mind or intellectual 
ability , schools must focus on activities, exercises, and courses of  study . This belief  
is based on the assumption that the brain is like a muscle that develops with mental 
exercise, and it is the responsibility of  schools to challenge the learner with tasks that 
stimulate the brain. 
Some of  the basic and general aims and objectives of  education in society are as 
follows:
1. Good citizens
The basic aim of  education is to create good citizens who can benefit society . 
Education develops the following social qualities in people:
• To respect the laws 
• To respect society’s customs and traditions
• To know their rights and duties
• To earn a livelihood in an honest way
• To be emotionally and mentally sound 
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
51
2. Transferring values
Education transfers the cultural, traditional, social, and religious values of  the past to 
the next generation. Our education system is transferring Islamic cultural and religious 
values, which include the Quran, the Hadith, and other related literature, as well as 
the practical lifestyle of  our holy prophet Muhammad (PBUH). The same is true about 
other states and religions that wish to transfer their culture to the next generation.
3. Education as social change agent
Education is a very powerful social change agent, as it is able to change a particular 
society’s social, religious, and political set-up. A desired change, such as to eliminate or 
improve outdated cultural values, can be brought about through formal and informal 
education, eventually leading to social change.
4. To explore the new dimensions of  science and matter
The main aim of  education is to enable an individual and society to explore new ideas 
and have more information about the material world.
 Ø Source: http://www .studylecturenotes.com/social-sciences/ 
education/271-aims-and-objectives-of-education
5. Education for vocational preparation
Schools should produce students who can enter the workforce and become produc-
tive. To this end, a ‘practical’ aspect of  schooling must be satisfied. Attempts must be 
made to educate all citizens, though it is understood that not all high school graduates 
can go to college. Society also needs trained workers after high school.
6. Education for individual development
The potential of  each person is developed through education. Each person is unique, 
and education uplifts the individual intellectually , physically , and emotionally . 
Education is seen as the vehicle for personal development.
 Ø Source: http://www .mtcglobal.org/uploads/26_mgmt.ppt.ppt
7. The Islamic aims of  education
Islam is a very dynamic and practical religion, which differs completely from the other 
religions of  the world. It expects people to be active and dynamic in the social order. 
The objectives of  Islamic education for an individual and society are as follows:
• The basic aim of  Islamic education is to provide information on how to pray ,
fast, and live an honourable life.
• Islam wants equilibrium between religious and social activities. A person
should be mentally , ph ysically , and socially sound to live a healthy life.
• Islam schools a Muslim to be ready for all kinds of  sacrifices to safeguard his
religion.
• Islamic education emphasizes the spirit of  Muslim brotherhood and tolerance,
so that each person can liv e in harmony in society .
• Islam requires people to be well informed about the social, political, and
economic affair s of  the contemporary world, in order to play their role in
collective affairs.
• Islam promotes simplicity in lifestyle and avoids luxury .
 Ø Source: http://www .studylecturenotes.com/social-sciences/education 
/271-aims-and-objectives-of-education
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
52
The modern aims of education
1. Learning to use information 
Educators recognize that it is impossible for a student to learn everything there is 
to know about a subject, because information is growing at a rate far faster than at 
any time in human history . So, learning to use information has become equivalent 
to learning certain basic information. Skills like acquiring, analysing, and reporting 
information are demanded – people have to apply their knowledge to be successful. 
2. Concept development 
As noted, to learn all that is known about a subject is impossible, so it is best to focus 
on the important ideas. The modern approach is to focus on the big ideas and not 
allow students to become engrossed in minutiae.
3. Problem-solving 
Students must be trained to apply their understanding of  information to ‘real-life’ 
problems. The problem-solving approach is based on the scientific method, where 
information is generated, analysed, and applied to a question of  importance.
4. Constructivism
Students must use information to understand concepts and generalization rather 
than just learn facts by rote. They must be able to apply the meaning of  the acquired 
information. 
5. Inquiry 
Inquiry is the basis for all science and relies on using data. Students work scientifically 
by collecting, analysing, and applying their understanding to problems or issues rather 
than working on suppositions or opinions.
 Ø Source: http://www .johnseelybrown.com/newlearning.pdf
Conclusion (5 min)
Summarize: Ask the Student Teachers to write down at least ten modern aims of  
education. Tell them to list the advantages of  education that can contribute to the 
betterment of  an individual. 
Assessment 
While discussing the topic, walk around the room and observe the Student Teachers. 
Be sure to notice the active participants.
 } Week 2: Session 3
T opics
• What is education?
• What is society?
• The role of  education in society
• The importance of  education in society
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
53
Learning outcome 
Student Teachers will be able to explain education and society , and identify the role 
and importance of  education in society .
Resources 
Chart for classroom and handouts for Student Teachers. 
Instructions, activities and strategies 
Introduction (5–10 min)
The main purpose of  education is to train individuals by preparing and qualifying 
them to integrate into society through emphasizing the values and morals of  society . 
Education promotes socializing, helping society to remain stable. It also prepares 
youngsters for adulthood, so that they step forward as leaders of  the next generation 
and contribute to strong families and strong communities. Children whose parents 
take an interest in their education show a willingness to learn. A forum of  teachers 
and scholars from all over the world assesses problems in education and society to 
produce balanced and comparative social and economic perspectives. 
Development of the lesson (40–45 min)
Interactive lecture (to be developed around the main points in the table below): Write 
the topic and subtopic of  the lecture on the board. Draw this table on the board (or 
make a handout and distribute it to the Student Teachers) and tell them to fill it in 
while they are listening to the lecture.
Education and 
society
Main points 
(Write down the main points of  the definition of   
education while listening to the lecture.)
What is education?
What is society?
The role of  education 
in society
The importance of  
education in society
The modern aims of  
education
Additional points to make about education:
• It helps families complete the socialization of  children in society .
• It transmits cultural heritage.
• It integrates the individual into a culture. 
• It helps form positive attitudes and values.
• It prepares students for their occupations.
• It contributes to a stronger national economy .
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
54
• It confers status (higher education usually equals higher status in society).
• It develops civic values.
• It fosters democratic participation in society .
References 
Kumar, B. (2011). What is the relationship between education and social change?  
Retrieved from 
 Ø http://www .preservearticles.com/201102224128/what-is-the-relationship- 
 between-education-and-social-change.html
Siddiqui, S. (2011). Education: Agent of  change. Retrieved from
 Ø http://shahidksiddiqui.blogspot.com/2011/04/education-agent-of-change.html
Themelis, S. (2009) Education as an agent for change (an online review of  Marxism and 
Educational Theory: Origins and Issues by Mike Cole. Routledge 2008). Retrieved from
 Ø http://www .aworldtowin.net/reviews/MarxEducationalTheory .html
Websites
Specialpeoplecentre.com.
 Ø http://www .specialpeoplecentre.com/education-in-pakistan-an-overview/
Ghazi, S. R., Ali, R., Khan, M. S., Hussain, S., & Fatima, Z. T . (2010). Causes of  the 
decline of  education in Pakistan and its remedies. Retrieved from
 Ø http://journals.cluteonline.com/index.php/TLC/article/view/139
Qadri, H. M. (2013, 22 May). State of  education in Pakistan. Pakistan Observer. 
Retrieved from 
 Ø http://pakobserver.net/detailnews.asp?id=89443&fb_source=message
Blair, D. (2009, 5 Nov). Lack of  basic education fuels rise in Taliban and extremism in 
Pakistan. The Telegraph. Retrieved from
 Ø http://www .telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/asia/pakistan/6503093/Lack-of- 
 basic-education-fuels-rise-in-Taliban-and-extremism-in-Pakistan.html
Promotion of  Education in Pakistan, Inc. (2006). The weakest link: A report on under-
graduate education in Pakistan. Retrieved from
 Ø http://www .pepfoundation.org/weakest_link.pdf
Chapter 5: Analysis of  higher education in Pakistan. Retrieved from
 Ø http://prr.hec.gov .pk/Chapters/575S-5.pdf
Teach for Pakistan. 
 Ø www .teachforpakistan.edu.pk/
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
55
Books and references
Ahmed, F . (1998). Ethnicity and politics in Pakistan. Karachi: Oxford University Press.
Al-Afandi, M. H. & Baloch, N. A. (1980). Curriculum and teacher education. Jeddah: King 
Abdul Aziz University , pp. 3–20. 
Amin, T . (1988). Ethno-national movements of  Pakistan: Domestic and international factors. 
Islamabad: Institute of  Policy Studies.
Anderson, B. (1991). Imagined communities: Reflections on the origin and spread of  nation-
alism (Rev . ed.). London: V erso.
Bhatia, K. K. (1985). Principles of  education. New Delhi: Kalyani Publisher, pp. 10–12.
Faure, E., Herrera, F ., Kaddoura, A., Lopes, H., Petrovsky , A. V ., Rahnema, M., & 
Ward, F . C. (1972). Learning to be: The world of  education today and tomorrow . 
Paris: UNESCO, pp. 138–144.
Ghafoor, A. (1994). Literacy efforts in Pakistan: From rhetoric to action. Islamabad: 
National Education and Training Commission, Ministry of  Education, Government 
of  Pakistan. 
Hayes, L. D. (1987). The crises of  education in Pakistan. Lahore: Vanguard Books Ltd.
Kneller, G. F . (1963). Foundations of  education. New York: John Wiley and Sons, pp. 
306–319.
Maududi, A. S (1966). Islami Tehzeeb aur us ke assol-o-mabodi. Lahore: Islamic 
Publications Limited.
Rashid, M. (1989). Allied material of  Foundations of  Education (Course Code 831). 
Islamabad: Allama Iqbal Open University , National Book Foundation Islamabad.
Pathak, R. P . (2009). Philosophical and sociological foundations of  education. New Delhi: 
Kanishka Publishers. 
Powell, S. D. (2012). Your introduction to education: Explorations in teaching. New Delhi: 
Pearson.
Qureshi, A. H. (1975). Education in Pakistan. Karachi: Ma’aref  Publishers.
Rahman, T . (1996). Language and politics in Pakistan. Karachi: Oxford University Press.
Saxena, S. (1993). Philosophical and sociological foundation of  education (Rev . ed.). 
Meerut: R. Lall Book Depot, pp. 202–215.
Shami, P .A. & Hussain, S. (2006). Development of  education in Pakistan. Islamabad: 
Academy of  Educational Planning and Management.
Pakistani policy documents on education 
Bengali, K. (1999). History of  education: Policy making and planning in Pakistan. 
Islamabad: Sustainable Development Policy Institute.
Population Census Organization. (2001.) 1998 Census report of  Pakistan. Islamabad: 
Population Census Organization, Statistics Division, Government of  Pakistan.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
56
GOP . (1947). Proceedings of  the Pakistan educational conference 27 November-1 December 
1947. Karachi: Ministry of  Interior, Education Division.
GOP . (1948). Proceedings of  the first meeting of  the Advisory Board of  Education for 
Pakistan. Karachi: Government of  Pakistan, Education Division.
GOP . (1949). Proceedings of  the second meetings of  the Advisory Board of  Education for 
Pakistan 7th–9th February 1949. Karachi: Government of  Pakistan, Education Division. 
GOP . (1950). Report of  proceedings of  the fourth meeting of  the Advisory Board of  Education 
for Pakistan. Karachi: Government of  Pakistan, Education Division.
GOP . (1954). Report of  proceedings of  the sixth meeting of  the Advisory Board of  Education 
for Pakistan. Karachi: Ministry of  Education, Government of  Pakistan.
GOP . (1959). Report of  the Commission on National Education. Karachi: Ministry of  
Education, Government of  Pakistan.
GOP . (1966). Report of  the Commission on Student’s Problems and Welfare. Islamabad: 
Ministry of  Education, Government of  Pakistan.
GOP . (1970). New education policy. Islamabad: Ministry of  Education, Government of  
Pakistan.
GOP . (1972). The education policy 1972–1980. Islamabad: Ministry of  Education, 
Government of  Pakistan.
GOP . (1979). Qaumi Committee Barae Deeni Madaris [Urdu]. Islamabad: Ministry of  
Religious Affairs, Government of  Pakistan.
GOP . (1992). National Education Policy. Islamabad: Planning Commission, Government 
of  Pakistan.
GOP . (1998). National Education Policy: 1998–2010. Islamabad: Ministry of  Education, 
Government of  Pakistan.
GOP . (2002). Education sector reforms: Action plan 2001–2004. Islamabad: Ministry of  
Education, Government of  Pakistan.
GOP . (2003). Economic survey 2002–03. Islamabad: Finance Division, Economic 
Adviser’s Wing, Government of  Pakistan.
Websites
UNESCO Teacher Education in Pakistan.
 Ø http://unesco.org.pk/education/teachereducation/policy .html
Higher Education Commission. 
 Ø http://www .hec.gov .pk/InsideHEC/Divisions/AECA/CurriculumRevision/  
 Pages/RevisedCurricula.aspx
Nevada Partnership for Inclusive Education. 
 Ø http://www .nvpie.org/inclusivehtml
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
57
REPRESENTATIVE SYLLABUS 2
By
Drs Mussaret Sheikh and Sadaf Ayoob
Credit hours 
3 hours (3 hours per week)
Year/semester   
Year 3, Semester 5
Prerequisites
Successful completion of semesters 1–4
Course description
This course starts with the foundational knowledge upon which education is based. 
This knowledge base is addressed from three different perspectives: 1) The philosophy 
of  education in historical and Islamic perspectives, 2) Sociological foundations, and 
3) The historical development of  education in Pakistan. In all the foundation areas 
there is an implicit connection between an idea and its eventual application in real-life 
situations. The main focus of  the course is to train and equip Student Teachers to 
become agents of  change in society so that they can cultivate values and an aesthetic 
sense in their students.
Learning outcomes
After completing the course, Student Teachers will be able to:
• define the general concept of  philosophy and its relevance to education
• compare educational philosophies: perennialism, essentialism, progressivism,  
 and eclectic 
• compare the perspectives of  Muslim and Western philosophers
• understand the relationship between the sociological foundations of  education  
 and their historical and cultural aspects
• critically review the types of  education and the current educational issues in   
 Pakistan in order to understand how foundations of  education can address the 
  challenges faced by policymakers, curriculum developers, and teacher   
 educators. 
T eaching-learning approaches 
This course will employ interactive teaching-learning approaches, such as question-
ing, cooperative learning, discussions, and presentations by the Student Teachers on 
their study and research work. Wherever possible, guest speakers may be invited and 
educational DVDs and CDs will be made available.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
58
UNIT 1: Introduction to the Foundations of  Education course
Disciplines such as philosophy , sociology , psychology , and anthropology contrib-
ute to the foundations of  education. This unit will build connections between 
schools and different philosophical beliefs that form schooling practices. Student 
Teachers will be helped to recognize that the development of  a civil society 
depends on the education of  the young as responsible, thoughtful, and enterpris-
ing citizens. This is a challenging task requiring a deep understanding of  ethical 
principles, moral values, political theory , aesthetics, and economics. 
Week # T opics/themes
1
Introduction to the course
Sharing of  learning expectations, course assessment, and grading 
Definition and concepts of  the foundations of  education 
2
The importance of  educational philosophy
The scope of  educational philosophy
The relationship between educational philosophy and other disciplines
Duration: 2 weeks (6 hours)
Unit 1 learning objectives
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l describe and explain different perspectives on the foundations of  education
 l explain the scope and importance of  educational philosophy
 l relate educational philosophy to other disciplines.
UNIT 2: Educational philosophies
This unit will assist Student Teachers in comparing the ways in which different 
philosophies in education attempt to answer the following questions: What 
is education? What is the purpose of  education? What does it mean to know 
something? This will enable them to identify the general theoretical perspectives 
that can be used to describe and explain a philosophy , as well as demonstrate 
an understanding of  how philosophy coordinates with various activities of  the 
individual and the society . Student Teachers will build their own philosophy . 
They will consider how teachers can promote logic and ethics in students and the 
importance of  aesthetics in learning. 
Week # T opics/themes
3
The schools of  thought 
Introduction to perennialism and essentialism
The philosophical foundation of  perennialism and essentialism
Teaching methods
Character-building of  students
1
2
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
59
UNIT 2: Educational philosophies
Week # T opics/themes
4
Introduction to progressivism and eclectic philosophy
The philosophical foundation of  progressivism and eclectic philosophy
Teaching methods
Character-building of  students
5
The axiology of  education
Logic and education
Ethics and education
Aesthetics and education
Duration: 3 weeks (9 hours)
Unit 2 learning objectives
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l describe and explain educational philosophy
 l identify the concept of  the axiology of  education
 l explain different schools of  thought, such as perennialism, essentialism, and   
 pro gressivism.
UNIT 3: Comparative analysis of  the philosophical perspectives of  Muslim 
and W estern philosophers
This unit will explore the sources of  educational aims in Pakistan. It will enable 
Student Teachers to compare and contrast the perspectives of  Muslim and select-
ed Western philosophers. The unit will also discuss the sources of  knowledge 
in Islam. It will assist Student Teachers in identifying the components of  their 
philosophical thought.
Week # T opics/themes
6
Muslim philosophers:
• Imam Ghazali
• Sir Syed Ahmad Khan
• Allama Iqbal
7
Selected Western philosophers and educators with a pedagogical philosophy:
• Friedrich Froebel
• John Dewey
• Maria Montessori
8
Sources of  knowledge in Islam:
• Quran
• Hadith
3
2
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
60
UNIT 4: Sociological foundations
What is the relationship between education and society? What is the school’s role 
in social change? Formal schooling as a concept is not particularly old. Student 
Teachers will deliberate on current schooling practices in order to critique them 
and bring about positive social change.
Week # T opics/themes
9
Sociological foundation:
• Education and society
• Social class and educational opportunities   
• The school and the teacher as factors in social development
10 The school’s role in social change
11 The difference between historical and cultural foundations
4
Duration: 3 weeks (9 hours)
Unit 4 learning objectives
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l identify the impact of  education on the social development of  the child
 l explain the role of  the school in the creativity and critical thinking of  the learner
 l discuss historical and cultural foundations and their effects on students.
Duration: 3 weeks (12 hours)
Unit 3 learning objectives
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l explain the notion of  philosophical perspectives 
 l describe the differences between Islamic and Western thinkers with reference to  
 education
 l discuss the sources of  knowledge in Islam (Sunnah and Hadith).
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
61
UNIT 5: Education in Pakistan 
This unit will focus on the different educational policies of  Pakistan and their 
relevance to the objectives of  education. It will also address global challenges of  
education as they are experienced in Pakistan at the school, teacher, and institu-
tional level. 
Week # T opics/themes
12
Concept of  development as seen in educational policies:
• Educational Policy (1970–1972)
• Educational Policy (1979–1992)
• Educational Policy (1998–2010)
• Educational Policy (2009)
13 Global challenges of  education as they are experienced in Pakistan 
Duration: 2 weeks (6 hours) 
Unit 5 learning objectives 
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l explain the different educational priorities in policies, along with the objectives of    
 polic y
 l discuss the global challenges of  education in Pakistan.
UNIT 6: The knowledge-based economy
This unit will focus on the contribution of  education to the economy and the 
economic order. It will also highlight and critique how education is linked to inno-
vation and economic growth in a knowledge-based economy . It will call attention 
to the fact that when societies focus solely on economics, they miss the important 
role of  education in the development of  society as a whole.
Week # T opics/themes
14 Concept of  the social order
15
Economic aspects of  education
Human resources
Capital resources
16 Education and economic growth versus education for personal and social development
5
6
Duration: 3 weeks (9 hours) 
Unit 6 learning objectives 
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l describe education and the economic order
 l explain the economic aspects of  education in Pakistan
 l critique education in relation to economic growth.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
62
Grading policy 
University-approved grading policy will be practiced. The faculty will provide course-
work assignments and quizzes as and where necessary . The course will be assessed on 
an ongoing basis through coursework, assignments, and the end-of-semester exam.
References
Chandra, S. S. & Sharma, K. R. (2004). Principles of  education. New Delhi: Atlantic 
Publishers.
Fry , H., Ketteridge, S., & Marshall, S. (1999). A handbook for teaching and learning in 
higher education: Enhancing academic practice. London: Routledge Falmer.
Haq, M. A. (1990). Educational philosophy of  the Holy Quran. Lahore: Institute of  Islamic 
Culture.
Jalazai, M. K. (1999). History of  Islamic education. Lahore: Majeed Book Depot. 
Khalid, T . (2005). Education: An introduction to educational philosophy and history. 
Karachi: National Book Foundation.
Kneller, F . (1964). Introduction to the philosophy of  education (2nd ed.). New York: John 
Wiley & Sons.
Raina, M. K. (2006). Development in education. New Delhi: Maxford Books.
Zias, R. S. (1976). Curriculum: Principles and foundation, New York: Harper and Row .
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
63
T eaching notes: Representative syllabus 2
Outline of content
Unit 1 Introduction to the Foundations of  Education course
 Unit outline (including outcomes and resources)  
   
Unit 2   Educational philosophies
 Unit outline (including outcomes and resources) 
       
Unit 3   Comparative analysis of  the philosophical perspectives of  Muslim   
 and Western philosophers
  
Unit 1: Introduction to the Foundations of Education course
Outline 
In this unit, Student Teachers will become familiar with the concept of  the founda-
tions of  education and the relevance of  philosophy to education. They will be helped 
to appreciate that the purpose of  this course is not to teach different disciplines like 
philosophy , sociology , psychology , and anthropology , but to see how the foundations 
of  education draw concepts from these knowledge bases. It should help them recog-
nize that the development of  a civil society depends on the education of  the young 
as responsible, thoughtful, and enterprising citizens, which is a challenging task 
requiring a deep understanding of  ethical principles, moral values, political theory , 
aesthetics, and economics, not to mention of  children themselves. Thus, this unit 
will build connections between schooling and the different philosophical beliefs that 
influence schooling practices.
Learning outcomes
At the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following: 
 l appreciate the significance of  the Foundations of  Education course 
 l define philosophy 
 l define educational philosophy 
 l explain the influence of  educational philosophies on the aims of  schooling   
 practices. 
Topics
• Introduction to the course; sharing of  learning expectations, course assessment,  
 and grading 
• Definition and concepts of  the foundations of  education
• The importance of  educational philosophy
• The scope of  educational philosophy
• The relationship between educational philosophy and other disciplines
• The connection between schooling and the different philosophical beliefs that  
 inform schooling practice
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
64
Essential knowledge questions
• What is the basic concept of  educational foundations?
• What is the relationship between educational philosophy and other disciplines?
Planning notes
1. Instructional procedures
In this course, apply techniques and methods based on your experience and knowledge. 
The techniques outlined below are not exclusive and, therefore, other effective tech-
niques and methods can be used. Suggested techniques include the following:
• Interactive lectures 
• Discussions 
• Group and individual work sessions
• Individual reading and self-assessment exercises
2. Practical activities
Conduct the following activities to provide the Student Teachers with hands-on 
experience:
• Share websites and other sources for reading 
• Assess the views of  different Student Teachers in order to judge their perception  
 of  the foundations of  education.
3. Assessment 
• Assignment on the importance of  educational philosophy
• Assignment on the relationship between educational philosophy and other   
 disciplines
 } Week 1, Sessions 1 and 2
T opics 
• Introduction to the course 
• Sharing of  learning expectations, course assessment, and grading
• The meaning and concepts of  the foundations of  education
Instructions, activities and strategies 
Introduction (5 min)
The first two weeks will focus on the educational foundations, so as to increase the 
interest of  the Student Teachers. The course will be introduced during the first session.
Brainstorming (15 min)
Write ‘The meaning and scope of  educational foundations’ on the board. Let Student 
Teachers say what they understand about the meaning and concept of  the foundations 
of  education. Take as many ideas as time permits. Write down all the meanings they 
suggest.
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
65
Group brainstorming (10 min)
Divide the Student Teachers into four groups. Write a key concept (and its definition) 
from educational foundations on a piece of  paper so that there is one for each group. 
(If  the groups are too large, consider having groups of  five to six and prepare more 
concepts.) Each group will connect the definitions from the list on the board with the 
text definition of  the concepts they represent. (They will look at the definitions listed 
on the board and see how their definitions match the text definitions.)
Lecture (30 min) 
Introduce the course. Review the major definitions of  the four groups, linking these 
with the text definitions and relating them by explaining the concept. Points to 
emphasize: 
• The concept of  the foundations of  education and key concepts that may be   
 dr awn from the field
• Some definitions
 } Week 1, Session 3 
T opic 
Why study educational foundations or the importance of  the foundations of  
education?
Discussion and think, pair, share
Initiate discussion on the meaning and concepts of  educational foundations. Think, 
pair, share activity: Have Student Teachers present their views on different concepts 
of  educational foundations. Have these changed as a result of  the discussions in the 
previous sessions?
Show the following quotation on chalkboard, a chart, or a computer, or duplicate it on 
a handout. Have Student Teachers work in pairs and read it together:
In modern times there are opposing views about the practice of  education. There 
is no general agreement about what the young should learn either in relation to 
virtue or in relation to the best life; nor is it clear whether their education ought to 
be directed more towards the intellect than towards the character of  the soul. And it 
is not certain whether training should be directed at things useful in life, or at those 
conducive to virtue, or at non-essentials. And there is no agreement as to what in 
fact does tend towards virtue. Men do not all prize most highly the same virtue. So 
naturally they differ also about the proper training for it. 
Ask pairs to discuss the following question: Does this quotation have any relevance to 
students or classrooms you know? After a few minutes of  discussion, point out that 
the quotation is from the Greek philosopher Aristotle and was written 2000 years ago. 
Does this change their view on the quotation? What makes it relevant today? 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
66
 } Week 2, Sessions 1 and 2 
T opic 
The importance and scope of  educational foundations 
Pair-share activity 
In groups of  two, have the Student Teachers discuss the importance of  educational 
psychology and then be prepared to present to the whole class. Questions to think about:
• Why is educational psychology considered a foundation?
• What is the difference between educational psychology and other psychologies  
 (e.g. clinical psycholog y)?
• In what ways does educational psychology contribute to schooling?
NOTE: In education, behaviourist psychology has often been equated with educational 
psychology because of the influence of Thorndike’s work. This has ‘privileged’ more 
technocratic approaches to education and denied teachers the rich array of perspectives 
available in the field of psychology.
} Week 2, Session 3 
T opic 
The relationship between educational philosophy and other disciplines
Instructions, activities and strategies 
Present a PowerPoint presentation (to show the relationship) and an interactive 
lecture on the relationship between psychology and educational foundations. Ask 
Student Teachers to point out and then explain different relationships with education.
Note: Many PowerPoint presentations are available through Slide Share, at 
 Ø http://www .slideshare.net/
Unit 2: Educational philosophies 
Description
This unit will enable the Student Teachers to identify the general theoretical perspec-
tives that can be used to describe and explain educational philosophy , as well as to 
demonstrate an understanding of  how philosophy coordinates with various activities 
of  the individual and society . It will explain how teachers can use the perennialism, 
essentialism, progressivism, and eclectic philosophy schools of  thought to build up 
their own philosophy . This will also explain how teachers can promote logic and ethics 
in students and the importance of  aesthetics in learning, and identify the factors that 
affect their interest in appraising beauty with the additional innovative concepts of  
philosophy . 
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
67
Learning objectives 
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l describe and explain educational philosophy
 l identify the concept of  the axiology of  education
 l explain different schools of  thought, such as perennialism, essentialism, and   
 progressivism.
Essential knowledge questions
• What is philosophy?
• What is the difference between philosophy and science?
• How do different schools of  thought build students’ perceptions of  education?
• How can teachers promote conceptual change in student learning, drawing   
 upon different values and reasoning?
Practical activities
Conduct the following activities to provide the Student Teachers with hands-on 
experience:
1) Identify different types of  thought as adopted in the performance of  both   
 students and teachers.
2) Ask three groups of  the class to examine the practical implementation of  each  
 school of  thought and then give suggestions on what teaching method could   
 best be applied in effective teaching and learning at the elementary level.
3) Select one of  the groups as an experimental group to test the aesthetic and   
 logical level of  students and identify which aspect is most important for all-  
 round development.
 } Week 3, Sessions 1 and 2
T opic
Introduction to perennialism and essentialism
Instructions, activities and strategies 
Introduction (30 min)
Introduce a topic. Connect the topic with the educational needs of  students and teach-
ers. Discuss perennialism and essentialism by covering concepts, teaching method, and 
character-building of  students. (Notes are given at the end of  the session plans.)
Group discussion (20 min)
Discuss the schools of  thought by linking them with technical terms and canvas the 
views of  the Student Teachers. Focus on how philosophical thought occurs.
Summary (10 min)
Summarize the whole session. 
Group work will be initiated to discuss the main idea or focus of  philosophy . Have one 
of  the members of  each group present their discussion ideas to the class.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
68
 } Week 3, Session 3 
T opic 
Teaching method and character-building of  students
Instructions, activities and strategies 
Video activity 
Cooperative learning on the principles of  learning, discussing which method is most 
applicable in a given circumstance, by watching the Khawaja Moinuddin drama serial 
Taleem-e-Balighan, available on YouTube 
 Ø www .youtube.com/watch?v=U1lPfQV3y-M
Pair-share activity 
In groups of  two, share a teaching method and identify suggestions about which 
teaching method should be given priority to promote learning under different 
circumstances. If  time permits, each pair could meet in a group with two other pairs 
and share the teaching method they selected as well as their suggestions.
 } Week 4, Sessions 1 and 2 
T opics 
• Introduction to progressivism and eclectic philosophy 
• Philosophical ideas based on a literature review on progressivism and   
 philosophy 
Instructions, activities and strategies 
Student Teachers work in two groups to review relevant literature of  at least one 
school of  thought. Prepare for this session by assigning articles or book chapters, or 
having Student Teachers perform an Internet search on one school of  thought prior 
to the session. They can then discuss the reading in class and share it with other groups 
in a PowerPoint presentation. 
 } Week 4, Session 3 
T opic 
Teaching methods and character-building of  students
Instructions, activities and strategies 
Use Agha Haher’s drama serial Taleem-e-Balighan to illustrate alternative views on 
the history of  Pakistan. Ask Student Teachers to talk about the following questions: 
Why do alternative views exist? What is the historical foundation of  education in 
Pakistan? How do different ways of  teaching a subject, such as history , contribute to 
the character of  students?
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
69
Pair-share activity 
In groups of  two, have Student Teachers share a teaching method and present sugges-
tions on which teaching method should be given priority to promote learning under 
different circumstances. 
 } Week 5, Sessions 1 and 2
T opics 
• The axiology of  education
• Logic and education
• Ethics and education 
Instructions, activities and strategies 
Let Student Teachers watch clips of  the drama Man Chale ka soda, Hareet Kadha & 
Zawyia by Ashfaq Ahmad for logical reasoning, This will assist them in knowing about 
the nature of  man, the nature of  the universe, the nature of  knowledge, and the 
purpose of  life in the universe. The drama will also help them understand how logic 
and ethical values are important for personal development. At the end, ask them to 
give a justification of  a character on the basis of  logic and ethics.
Unit 3: Comparative analysis of philosophical 
perspectives
Description
This unit will enable the Student Teachers to compare and contrast the different 
perspectives of  Muslim and Western philosophers. It will also identify the components 
of  their philosophical thought and explain how teachers can promote the sources 
of  knowledge in Islam through the Quran and the Hadith. Student Teachers will be 
introduced to the given subthemes as theory and will learn to view them as tech-
niques of  motivation to build up their own philosophy in both teaching and learning.  
 
Duration: 3 weeks (12 hours)
Learning objectives 
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l explain the notion of  philosophical perspectives 
 l describe the difference between Islamic and Western thinkers with reference to   
 education
 l discuss sources of  knowledge in Islam (Sunnah and Hadith).
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
70
 } Week 5, Session 3 
T opic 
Aesthetics and education
Instructions, activities and strategies 
• Brainstorm questions about the following: 
¡¡ What is beauty? 
¡¡ Does beauty lie in the eyes of  the beholder? 
• Work in groups to come up with a list of  ways through which beauty can be   
 appraised.
• Work in groups on the question: Can beauty be analysed through a publication  
 such as National Geographic or by travelling in nature or becoming part of  nature?
Essential knowledge questions
• What is a philosophical perspective?
• What is the difference between Muslim and Western philosophers?
• How can teachers use sources of  knowledge (e.g. Quran and Hadith) in Islam  
 to build philosophical thought?
Practical activities
Conduct the following activities to provide the Student Teachers with hands-on 
experience:
1) Plot different types of  teaching methods and ask the Student Teachers to   
 identify which philosopher created each concept. 
2) In groups, have the class examine the practical implementation of  different   
 strategies of  learning. Then have the groups give suggestions on which  
 philosopher could modify which aspects of  learning in learners.
3) Ask the Student Teachers to enlist sources of  knowledge in the Quran and the  
 Hadith related to education.
 } Week 6, Session 1 
T opic 
Muslim philosophers: Imam Ghazali
Instructions, activities and strategies 
Divide Student Teachers into three groups and ask one group to find reference books 
on Imam Ghazali’s concept of  teaching, another on student-teacher relationships, and 
the third on the concept of  punishment.
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
71
 } Week 6, Session 2 
T opic
Sir Syed Ahmad Khan
Instructions, activities and strategies 
Create a group activity involving articles on Sir Syed Ahmad Khan. Have Student 
Teachers prepare a list of  work written about him.
 } Week 6, Session 3 
T opic 
Allama Iqbal
T eaching ideas 
Brainstorming activity on philosophy , based on the Self  Ego concept: Have a class 
discussion on how it helps in awakening your own self  and how important it is to 
become aware of  your own self. 
Pair-share activity
In groups of  two, have the Student Teachers share with each other their ideas on how 
the Self  Ego/Khudi concept can best be used in the teaching-learning process through 
Iqbal’s Reconstruction of  Islamic Thought and his poetry . 
 } Week 7, Session 1 
T opic 
Western philosophers: John Dewey
Instructions, activities and strategies 
Have the class prepare presentations of  10–15 minutes based on Student Teachers 
who are involved in real-life tasks and challenges in which they learn.
 } Week 7, Session 2 
T opic 
Friedrich Froebel
Friedrich Froebel (1782–1852) is best known for his emphasis on each child’s individ-
uality . He urged respect for the child and emphasized the importance of  an environ-
ment in which the child can thrive. He believed that self-activity and play are key to 
the development of  personhood. See 
 Ø http://www .froebelweb.org/web2005.html
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
72
 } Week 7, Session 3 
T opic 
Maria Montessori
Maria Montessori believed that character is built through what children experience, 
not what they are told. Her approach to education was to help children interact with 
materials that relate to life experiences. She believed that this would build on their 
natural curiosity and promote a love of  learning. See: 
 Ø http://www .alfredmontessori.com/montessori-philosophy .htm
T eaching ideas 
Brainstorming: Have a brainstorming session about autonomous learners, higher-  
order thinking skills, and critical and creative thinking. Discuss how each helps in the 
teaching-learning process. 
Pair-share activity: In groups of  two, have the Student Teachers share with each other 
their ideas on how creative thinking occurs in students even when the they are very 
young. 
 } Week 8, Session 1 
T opic 
Concepts related to different sources of  knowledge  
Instructions, activities and strategies 
Use a cooperative learning approach to explore the meaning and concept of  knowledge. 
Work in groups to come up with a list to present on different sources of  knowledge.
 } Week 8, Session 2 
T opic 
Quran
Instructions, activities and strategies 
Have Student Teachers share their own experiences about the documentaries of  
Harun Yahya (for example, The Creation in Living Things is a Source of  Inspiration for 
Technology, available at http://www .harunyahya.com/en/works/47132/Oxygen--our-
source-of-life) and write down related Quranic references.
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
73
 } Week 8, Session 3 
T opic 
Hadith
Instructions, activities and strategies 
In groups, have the Student Teachers review literature about different Hadith in the 
library and prepare handouts. Each group will present a PowerPoint presentation on 
Hadith related to a teaching method or the role of  the teacher.
 
Assignments
Assignment I: Human charters: Comparative analysis between W estern 
and Islamic thought 
The human charter and the definition of  a society and guiding principles were given 
to Muslims 1400 years ago. It is known as Meesaq-e-Madina. Another great sermon 
that is frequently referenced is the Ahakari Khutaba, or the Last Sermon. Read the 
two documents and compare them with the Human Charter developed by United 
Nations. Reflect on the kind of  society and the social practices that we observe today . 
As a teacher of  the foundations of  education, how will you put these teachings into 
practice? What aspects do you think are necessary to implement these guidelines? 
Prepare your comments and strategies of  implementation and share them with the 
whole class. This assignment can be done individually or as a group activity . The 
presentations can be PowerPoint, charts, or another creative way to present. 
The marking of  this assignment has two steps: 
• Step 1 is on the written report 
• Step 2 is on the presentation 
A rubric will be shared by your faculty to help you organize the assignment. 
Assignment II: Comparative analysis of the Education Policy of Pakistan, 2009 
Analyse the Education Policy of  Pakistan, 2009. In this written analysis, explore the 
roots of  the policy – the ideology that led to its creation, the sociopolitical context 
during the development period, and the outcome or impact of  the policy . In this 
paper, thoroughly examine the foundations of  the policy and identify the stakehold-
ers’ explicit and implicit values. Also develop the paper as a historical view on the 
policy and its context. Although you will be reviewing the Education Policy , 2009, 
compare salient features with education policies of  1998. Present the analysis and 
reflections through a written paper of  1500 words and a verbal presentation of  20 
minutes to the class.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
74
The written policy analysis must include:
A. Abstract: Provide a summary of  the policy selected for study . Identify the aims and 
rationale of  the policy (approx. half  a page). 
B. Historical roots: Define the problem this policy is meant to solve. Discuss the 
ideology of  the time. Fully describe the context leading to the problem identification; 
discuss the policy objectives (approx. 1–2 pages). 
C. Sociopolitical context: Describe how the policy was implemented. Identify the value 
orientation of  the decision-makers and the competing values of  the time. Consider 
issues related to power, leadership strategies, and formal and informal agendas 
(approximately 1–2 pages). 
D. Outcome or impact: Describe the outcome or impact of  the policy on constituent 
groups. Compare and contrast intended and unintended outcomes (approximately 
1–2 pages). 
E. Critique: Provide your personal reaction to the policy . Assess how effectively the 
policy achieved its intended outcomes. Describe other implications of  the policy not 
addressed in the previous sections (approximately 2–4 pages). 
Assignment III: Constructing a personal philosophy of education
You are provided with a self-assessment questionnaire. Complete the self-assessment 
and analyse your responses with the help of  the response list. Now develop a personal 
philosophy of  education, building on the knowledge that you have gained while com-
paring both Western and Islamic philosophies of  education. The following section will 
guide you in the construction of  your personal philosophy statements:
• My philosophical system: Reflect which one is more dominating and why . 
• Meaning: What is more important: intellect, emotions, or values? 
• What is reality in relation to humans, their growth, and their instincts? 
• What is the nature of  being human: rational, caring, or selfish?
Professional practice values
Educational aims
Educational methods
Educational content 
Adapted from personal and professional philosophy construction: 
 Ø http://oregonstate.edu/instruct/ed416/selfassessment.html
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
75
Teaching resources: Units 1 and 2
Educational philosophies 
self-assessment  
This could be used at the beginning of  the course and again at the end, or after 
completion of  the unit on educational philosophy .
This questionnaire will help you recognize and name your own educational philos-
ophy . Respond to the given statements on a scale from 1, Strongly Disagree, to 5, 
Strongly Agree. Record the number of  your answer along with the question number 
for scoring.
1
The curriculum should be universal; a given body of  information about 
Western civilization should be taught through discussion and lecture. 1 2 3 4 5
2
Students are makers of  meaning and construct their understandings from 
active experience, rather than through transmission from teachers. 1 2 3 4 5
3
Education should emphasize personal growth through solving problems 
that are real to students. 1 2 3 4 5
4
The curriculum should not be predetermined; rather, it should spring from 
students' interests and needs. 1 2 3 4 5
5 It is necessary and good that schools instil traditional values in students. 1 2 3 4 5
6
Representing information as symbols in the mind is an important part of  
learning. 1 2 3 4 5
7
Schools exist to provide practical preparation for work and life, not to 
nourish personal development. 1 2 3 4 5
8
Teaching the great works of  literature is less important than involving 
students in activities to criticize and shape society . 1 2 3 4 5
9
Teachers, rather than imparting knowledge, are facilitators of  conditions 
and experiences so students can construct their own understandings. 1 2 3 4 5
10
The aim of  education should remain constant regardless of  differences in 
era or society; it should not vary from one teacher to another. 1 2 3 4 5
11
Schools should encourage student involvement in social change to aid in 
societal reform. 1 2 3 4 5
12
The emphasis in schools should be hard work, respect for authority , and 
discipline, rather than encouraging free choice. 1 2 3 4 5
13
If  encouraging and nourishing environments are provided, learning will 
flourish naturally because people have an inherent tendency to learn. 1 2 3 4 5
14
Students, like computers, are information processors who must make sense 
of  events and objects in their environments. 1 2 3 4 5
S
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
76
15
Schools should guide society towards significant social change rather than 
merely passing on traditional values. 1 2 3 4 5
16
Teachers should concentrate on conveying a common core of  knowledge 
rather than experimenting with modifying the curriculum. 1 2 3 4 5
17
The curriculum should focus on basic skills instead of  students' individual 
interests. 1 2 3 4 5
18
Students must learn to make good choices and to be responsible for their 
behaviour. 1 2 3 4 5
19
Conflicts with current understandings trigger the need to learn and to make 
meaning. 1 2 3 4 5
20
Rewards controlled by the external environment lead to and result in all 
learning. 1 2 3 4 5
21
Transmitting traditional values is less important than helping students to 
develop personal values. 1 2 3 4 5
22
The heart of  understanding learning is concerned with how information is 
encoded, processed, remembered, and retrieved. 1 2 3 4 5
23 Advocating the permanency of  the classics is a vital part of  teaching. 1 2 3 4 5
24
Perceptions centred in experience should be emphasized, as well as the 
freedom and responsibility to achieve one's potential. 1 2 3 4 5
25
Education should help drive society to better itself, rather than restricting 
itself  to essential skills. 1 2 3 4 5
26
Teachers should encourage democratic, project-based classrooms that 
emphasize interdisciplinary subject matter. 1 2 3 4 5
27
A knowledgeable individual facilitates or scaffolds learning for a novice, 
based on understanding the learner's developmental level and the content to 
be learned.
1 2 3 4 5
28
The role of  the teacher is to help create a nurturing atmosphere for stu-
dents and to promote the growth of  the whole person. 1 2 3 4 5
29 Teaching involves the support of  memory storage and retrieval. 1 2 3 4 5
30
Successful teaching creates an environment that controls student behaviour 
and assesses learning of  prescribed outcomes. 1 2 3 4 5
31
The greatest education centres mainly on the student's exposure to great 
achievements in subjects such as arts and literature. 1 2 3 4 5
32
Learning requires modifying internal knowing structures in order to assimi-
late and accommodate new information. 1 2 3 4 5
33
The role of  the teacher is to create an atmosphere that rewards desired 
behaviour toward achieving goals and extinguishes undesirable behaviour. 1 2 3 4 5
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
77
34
The primary goal for educators is to establish environments where students 
can learn independently through purposeful reflection on their experiences. 1 2 3 4 5
35
Principles of  reinforcement (anything that will increase the likelihood that 
an event will be repeated) and contiguity (how close two events must be 
chronologically for a bond to be created) are pivotal to explaining learning.
1 2 3 4 5
36
Students' involvement in choosing how and what they should learn is 
central to education. 1 2 3 4 5
37 Students need to develop declarative, procedural, and conditional knowledge. 1 2 3 4 5
38
One's behaviour is shaped by one's environment; elements within that 
environment (rather than the individual learner) determine what is learned. 1 2 3 4 5
39
The most distinctive quality of  human nature is the ability to reason; for 
this reason, the focus of  education should be on developing intellect. 1 2 3 4 5
40 Learning should guide students to active participation in social reform. 1 2 3 4 5
© 1999 LeoNora M. Cohen, OSU – School of  Education. Used with permission of  the author . 
For classroom use only.
Educational philosophies self-assessment scoring guide
Record the number you chose for each statement in the self-assessment in the spaces 
given. Add the numbers for each section to obtain your score for that section. The 
highest score(s) indicates your educational philosophy and psychological orientation.
Perennialism
The acquisition of  knowledge about the great ideas of  Western culture, including 
understanding reality , truth, value, and beauty , is the aim of  education. Thus, curric-
ula should remain constant across time and context. Cultivation of  the intellect is the 
highest priority of  an education. Teachers should directly instruct the great works of  
literature and art and other core curricula. 
+ + + + Total =
1 10 23 31 39
Essentialism
Essentialists believe that there is a core of  basic knowledge and skills that needs to 
be transmitted to students in a systematic, disciplined way . Schools should transmit 
a practical focus, rather than social policy , and an emphasis on intellectual and moral 
standards. It is a back-to-basics movement that emphasizes facts. Instruction is uni-
form, direct, and subject-centred. Students should be taught discipline, hard work, and 
respect for authority .
+ + + + Total =
5 7 12 16 17
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
78
Progressivism
Progressivists believe that education should focus on the child rather than the subject 
matter. The students’ interests are important, as is integration of  thinking, feeling, 
and doing. Learners should be active and learn to solve problems by experimenting 
and reflecting on their experience. Schools should help students develop personal and 
social values so that they can become thoughtful, productive citizens. Because society 
is always changing, new ideas are important to make the future better than the past. 
+ + + + Total =
4 24 26 34 36
 
Reconstructionism/Critical theory
Social reconstructionists advocate that schools should take the lead in reconstructing 
society in order to create a better world. Schools have more than a responsibil-
ity to transmit knowledge; they have the mission to transform society as well. 
Reconstructionists use critical thinking skills, inquiry , question-asking, and the taking 
of  action as teaching strategies. Students learn to handle controversy and to recognize 
multiple perspectives. 
+ + + + Total =
8 11 15 25 40
Information processing
For information-processing theorists, the focus is on how the mind of  the individual 
works. The mind is considered to be analogous to a computer. It uses symbols to 
encode, process, remember, and retrieve information. It explains how a given body of  
information is learned and suggests strategies to improve processing and memory . 
+ + + + Total =
6 14 22 29 37
 
Behaviourism
Behaviourists believe that behaviour is the result of  external forces that cause humans 
to behave in predictable ways, rather than from free will. Observable behaviour 
rather than internal thought processes is the focus; learning is manifested by a 
change in behaviour. This is known as the stimulus-response theory of  learning. The 
teacher reinforces what the student is to do again and again and ignores undesirable 
behaviours. The teacher’s role is to develop behavioural goals and establish reinforcers 
to accomplish goals. 
+ + + + Total =
20 30 33 35 38
Cognitivism/Constructivism
Learners actively construct their own understandings of  reality through acting upon 
and reflecting on experiences in the world. When a new object, event, or experience 
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
79
does not fit the learner’s present knowing structures, a conflict is provoked that 
requires an active quest to restore a balance. Teachers facilitate environmental condi-
tions and mediate experiences to support student learning.
+ + + + Total =
2 9 19 27 32
 
Humanism
Humanist educators consider learning from the perspective of  the human potential 
for growth by becoming the best one can be. The shift is to the study of  affective as 
well as cognitive dimensions of  learning. Beliefs include: human beings can control 
their own destiny; people are inherently good and will strive for a better world; people 
are free to act but must be responsible; behaviour is the consequence of  human 
choice; and people possess unlimited potential for growth and development. There is 
a natural tendency for people to learn, which will flourish if  nourishing, encouraging 
environments are provided. 
 
+ + + + Total =
3 13 18 21 28
© 1999 LeoNora M. Cohen, OSU – School of  Education. Used with permission of  the author . 
For classroom use only.
Web sources
Self-assessment
 Ø http://oregonstate.edu/instruct/ed416/selfassessment.html
Scoring guide
NOTE: Student T eachers could be given the self-assessment at the beginning of the class, 
for example, during session 1. They might take it again at the end of the course and reflect 
on any differences in their thinking as a result of the course.
Ø http://oregonstate.edu/instruct/ed416/scoringguide.html
Additional web resources
History and philosophy of  education
 Ø http://oregonstate.edu/instruct/ed416/module1.html
Philosophical perspectives in education
 Ø http://oregonstate.edu/instruct/ed416/PP1.html
Philosophical foundations of  curriculum 
 Ø http://peoplelearn.homestead.com/BEduc/Module_2.Philo.Psych.doc
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
80
Integrated 
teaching notes
4
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
81
During the curriculum development process, faculty were encouraged to keep notes 
that would be useful to them and others who may teach the course in the future. 
These were submitted along with the course syllabus. Teaching notes include ways 
to introduce the course, ideas for teaching units and sessions, sample lessons plans, 
and suggestions for reading and resource material. These have been integrated into 
a single section of  this document to create a rich and varied collection of  ideas easily 
accessible to others. The section is organized by theme. Except in cases where there is 
duplication of  ideas, faculty are credited with their contribution. 
Plan for designing the curriculum: 
Foundations of Education
By Abdul Hameed Soomro
Week Activities/T asks By/with whom
1 Aims, goals, and objectives; taxonomies of  objectives Teachers and students
2 Taxonomies of  objectives; aims and objectives of  education in Pakistan Teachers and students
3 Islamic foundation (objectives) in light of  the Quran and the Hadith Teachers
4 Islamic concept of  peace Teachers
5
Other religions and Islam
Ideology and the teacher
Teachers and students
6
Philosophy and education
The role of  educational philosophy
Teachers
7
Main philosophical schools of  thought:
Idealism
Realism
Teachers
8
Naturalism 
Pragmatism
Reconstructionism
Teachers and students
9
The role of  psychology in education
The contribution of  psychology to education
Teachers
10
Individual differences 
Learning and maturation
Teachers and students
11 Instructional strategies and psychology Teachers
12
Concepts of  society and culture
Social conditions and education
Teachers and students
13
Contribution of  sociology to education
Influence of  societal elements (economic and political) in education
Teachers and students
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
82
Week Activities/T asks By/with whom
14
Pre-Pakistan period (612 AD onward) Bangal and Adam’s Report 
Period from 1947–1958
Teachers and students
15
Period from 1969–1971 
Period from 1972–1979
Teachers and students
16
Period from 1980–1991 
Period from 1992 to date
Teachers and students
Ways of introducing the course
Important points to make in session 1
These notes may be useful in developing a mini-lecture or other activities to introduce 
the course.
Introduction to Education and Foundations of  Education are not the same thing.
1) An introductory course helps Student Teachers to understand schools and their  
 organization, methods of  teaching and ways of  learning, resources for teaching,  
 and the like.
2) A Foundations of  Education course should help Student Teachers look beneath  
 the surface of  the way things are in schools and ask how current practices and  
 policies came to be. If  it takes a critical perspective, it will ask whose interests   
 have been served across time (and currently) by certain traditions.
a) What were the goals of  those who built the structures we have inherited in  
 schools today?
b) What is the context in which schools and policies that govern schools in   
 Pakistan are situated today?
3) Interpretive, normative, and critical stances are important to understanding the  
 foundations of  education.
a. Interpretive exploration helps us to understand schools in their current context.
b. Normative exploration helps us see the value orientations of  those who have  
 guided policy and practice.
c. Critical investigation looks beneath the surface of  things to underlying   
 assumptions, contradictions, and inconsistences in values and policies. 
The disciplines that contribute to the foundations of  education are ‘windows’ through 
which we can ask interpretative, normative, and critical questions about policies and 
practices:
• What is the history of  the policy or practice?
• What were the social and political factors that contributed to its formation?
• How was it driven by economics, politics, religion, or philosophy?
• How do these same forces shape the policy today or prevent the creation of    
 new , perhaps better, policies and practices?
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
83
Introducing the course
You might consider one or a combination of  these activities during the first few 
sessions of  the course:
• 5-minute paper: Ask Student Teachers to write for 5 minutes on the topic: ‘The  
 purpose of  education is …’
• 5-minute paper: Ask Student Teachers to write for 5 minutes on the topic: ‘If   
 I could change one practice in Pakistani schools today it would be …’ Ask them  
 to describe the practice, why they think it is in place (or practiced), and why   
 they want to change it.
 Follow the 5-minute papers with an activity such as pair-sharing or sharing in 
 triads. Have class members share with each other and be prepared to discuss  
 ideas with the whole class.
• Reflection on the way things are: Choose one practice, for example, using   
 chalk and blackboard (it can be any practice: standing to recite; clocks in class  
 rooms; behavioural objectives; having class periods for different subjects, e.g.   
 math or reading). Have Student Teachers brainstorm with two or three people  
 around them to answer the question: Why is this a practice in Pakistani schools?  
 Where did it come from? How useful is it today? (The practice may or may not  
 be useful today; the point is to help them understand that most practices have a  
 history that is influenced by many things, including tradition.)
 You might want to have Student Teachers research on the Internet if  they have  
 access to a computer lab, or you could have them collect answers from people  
 around them on campus, at home, or in their community , and compare  
 common beliefs about school practices. 
Be prepared to point out the origins of  some of  the practices to the extent that you can. 
• The best education (40 min): Divide the class into groups of  five to six  
 members. Ask them to devise a system of  education for K–8. What will be   
 taught at each grade level? How will it be taught? What is your reason?
 Some groups might want to argue for multi-grade groupings. Encourage   
 freedom of  ideas. You might give them large pieces of  chart paper and ask them  
 to record their decisions and post them for the class to see.
Age/Grade Subjects How taught Why?
Following this activity , have Student Teachers do a gallery walk and look at each 
other’s work. Where possible, point out how ideas connect to current or past practices 
in Pakistan or elsewhere (historically or currently).
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
84
Notes on education in Pakistan
By Dr Muhammad Shahid Farooq, Allah Noor and Dr Amtul Hafeez
Education is a continuous, multidimensional task. Since 1947, various successive 
governments in Pakistan have placed education at the top of  their agenda. The 
first Educational Conference focused upon improving the quality and quantity of  
education through formal and non-formal ways. It also inculcated Islamic values in 
education. The 1959 commission report and the 1970 Educational Policy encouraged 
Urdu as the medium to achieve national unity among the diversified cultures of  our 
country , but this was not adequately implemented and these targets or aims were nev-
er achieved. Two new educational policies required the international community to 
take some practical steps in the education sector. The promotion of  higher education, 
vocational and technical education, and adult and non-formal modes of  education 
were emphasized by the 1972 and 1998–2010 policies to achieve universal primary 
education and increase the literacy rate. The National Education Foundation and the 
National Commission for Human Development decided to provide basic education to 
all children at their doorstep. The 2009 Educational Policy aims to achieve education 
for all, the universalization of  education, and free education up to the secondary 
level by hiring qualified schoolteachers. Involvement of  the private sector needs to be 
encouraged. A harmonized public-private partnership is the demand of  the day . The 
GDP ratio of  education would be gradually increased from 2% to 7% in 2018. Today’s 
teachers and the Student Teachers will discuss the different practices of  education in 
our country , enabling the Student Teachers to manage the human resources appropri-
ately to ensure the smooth running of  their respective educational institutions. And 
for this, maximum participation through a cooperative learning process is required. 
The Student Teachers should deal with education from a global perspective, analysing 
not only its needs, but also modes of  achieving them, such as the needs of  special 
education and how to acquire specific skills for imparting education to those students. 
Special learners will learn in the mainstream of  educational institutions through inclu-
sive learning, rather than being educated in separate institutions. Critical, analytical, 
and creative thinking in learners will be developed.
Ideas for teaching about foundations of 
education in Pakistan
Introduction
Whole-class brainstorming (10 min)
Ask Student Teachers to state one characteristic of  education in Pakistan or an educa-
tional issue with which they are familiar. List these on the board or chart paper. After 
a list has been generated that is large enough for discussion purposes, have the class 
look at it to see what might be missing. Add their ideas without commenting. 
Minute paper
Ask Student Teachers to select one characteristic from the list and write about it for a 
minute, explaining how they understand the issue. 
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
85
Pair–share (10 min)
Have Student Teachers share their papers.
Mini-lecture and whole-class discussion (20 min)
Ask Student Teachers to think about how understanding the foundations of  education 
might help teachers and communities better understand the issues they have listed. 
Accept a few suggestions. Conclude the session with a mini-lecture in which you fill 
in points they missed on their list and talk about some of  the significant educational 
issues facing Pakistan.
Assignment
Have Student Teachers reflect on their classroom experiences (including their 
practicum classrooms). What practices have you observed or experienced that have 
their roots in the culture of  the school and its community? What practices have you 
observed or experienced that relate to educational psychology? What practices seem 
to be driven by ideology? Assign a reflective paper of  two to three pages or have 
Student Teachers take field notes to bring to class and use for discussion. 
Session 2  
Connecting practices of educational foundations
Have groups of  Student Teachers share their short reports based on classroom visits 
or recollections of  classrooms. Ask: How can educational foundations help us under-
stand educational practices in Pakistan today?
Group brainstorming 
Organize the class into groups of  four to five members. Have each group choose one 
common practice in schools (e.g. having subjects organized by period or the use of  
textbooks). Ask them to think about where the practice originated. What is its history? 
Is there an economic reason for it? Is there a political basis? Social? Cultural?  Have 
them jot down notes from their discussions. 
Mini-lecture
Choose one common practice, such as the use of  textbooks. Prior to the class, pre-
pare notes on the origins of  the practice. (For example, the use of  textbooks is often 
associated with the fact that teachers are not adequately prepared or that countries do 
not trust teachers to provide accurate information. Textbooks are a way of  ‘delivering’ 
an appropriate curriculum.) There is an interesting history of  how textbooks became 
entrenched in classroom practice that you can use to help your Student Teachers 
understand that current practices are often rooted in historical, cultural, political, 
economic, sociological, and philosophical or ideological foundations. A discussion of  
textbooks around the world may be found at 
 Ø http://www .economist.com/node/21564554 and at http://educ.ubc.ca/courses/ 
 etec540/May08/goslina/researchtopic/index.html
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
86
Threats to quality education outline 
By Dr Muhammad Shahid Farooq, Allah Noor, and Dr Amtul Hafeez
NOTE: The Instructor might want to share these threats to quality education with Student 
T eachers through a mini-lecture or a PowerPoint presentation. Many may have been 
mentioned as characteristics of Pakistani schools. Sharing them will be insufficient to help 
Student T eachers understand how they relate to the foundations of education. Consider 
each of these in light of the foundations before sharing them with your class. Which ones 
seem connected to historical foundations? Ideological foundations? Other foundations?
The quality of  education at school levels in Pakistan: 
• Private and public schools
• The shortage of  trained teachers
• Ghost schools
• Textbooks
• Private tuition
The causes of  a low standard of  education at college level in Pakistan:
• The lack of  college autonomy
• The lack of  sufficient funds and facilities
• Inadequate basic education 
• Outdated methods of  teaching
• The lack of  assessment and quality improvement mechanisms 
• The lack of  learning techniques
The quality of  education at university level in Pakistan:
• Poor education system
• English language
• Political instability
• Poor infrastructure
• War against terror and the wave of  fundamentalism
• Weak legal system
• Heavy dependence on part-time lecturers 
• Inadequate library facilities
• The lack of  facilities
• Limited sports
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
87
An overview of  education in Pakistan: 
• Secularizing of  education
• Deficiency of  professional teachers
• Dropouts
• Poor examination system
• Low enrolment rate
• No free and compulsory education
• Corruption
Notes on threats to quality education in Pakistan
Today , Pakistan is facing a number of  problems (e.g. poverty , terrorism, insecurity , 
and many more). The basis of  all these problems is a lack of  awareness and tolerance, 
and illiteracy , all fostered by an ineffective education system. Several factors are 
responsible for instability in Pakistan, but education is the crucial one. The education 
system is facing some problems that threaten the quality of  education in Pakistan. 
Student Teachers need to be able to evaluate these threats from the perspectives of  the 
many cultures that constitute Pakistan. These threats all have a history that relates to 
educational foundations. Current threats include the following: 
• The secularization of  education: Is this a threat or is it an opportunity for  
 education for all? For example, religious minorities who are Pakistani citizens  
 might see secularization as a movement toward inclusion.
• Deficiency of  professional teachers.
• Dropouts: Parents who need children to work to support the family may see   
 this as less threatening than the prospect of  having inadequate food and shelter.  
 How is this problem related to the economic and sociological foundations of    
 education?
• Poor education system.
• Low enrolment rate: What are the issues that contribute to low enrolment?
• No free and compulsory education.
• Corruption.
Remember, the focus is on how educational foundations may illuminate these issues, 
not on understanding the issues in isolation.
Secularization of education
Pakistan is an ideological state, based on Islamic ideology , but it is still unclear what 
the Islamic content of  our curriculum should be. Some people believe our education 
system is unable to protect our religious norms and guide our generation according to 
Islam. Other people who consider themselves to be loyal Pakistanis believe that within 
an ideological state there must be protection of  minority rights. What do the foun-
dations of  Islamic education have to contribute to all of  Pakistani society , including 
non-Muslim minorities?
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
88
Deficiency of professional teachers
One of  the chronic threats to our education system is the shortage of  teachers, in part 
because merit criteria are ignored. Although the number of  teachers has been increas-
ing, it does not match the number of  students, and the student-teacher ratio is high.
Dropouts
The major problem in our education system is the large number of  dropouts. It 
happens due to economic reasons and an unattractive school environment. Thus, 
our school-going children cannot acquire the basic skills of  learning and a number of  
them fall back into the category of  illiteracy .
Poor examination system
Examinations are conducted to test the ability of  students and assess their standard of  
academic learning and knowledge. But our education system encourages rote learning 
and cramming for exams. This poor system has negatively affected our standard of  
education.
Low enrolment rate
Teacher absenteeism, untrained teachers, inadequate materials, and obsolete teaching 
methods are the main reasons for the low enrolment rate in our schools.
No free and compulsory education
In our education system, there is no free and compulsory education for all citizens 
on an equal basis. In other countries of  the region, there is free and compulsory basic 
education in order to create an educated society .
Corruption
Corruption is one of  the major threats to quality education in Pakistan. This is due to 
the lack of  accountability and transparency , along with the low salaries of  the staff.
Conclusion
Nobody can deny the fact that education is the backbone of  the development of  our 
nation. It develops people mentally , physically , socially , and spiritually . But we are on 
the verge of  destruction and the only method through which we can build our society 
is education. So, it is our responsibility to work for the betterment of  our education 
system so that we better align ourselves with Western countries.
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
89
Suggested course assignments
By Dr Asif Khan and Naila Siddiqua
Three assignments are suggested for marking coursework:
1) A project worth 20%
2) A personal framework reflection (PFR) paper, worth 10%.
3) Critical analyses and leading a reading session on articles on the foundations of   
 education, worth 10%.
1. Project work 
Comparing the 2009 Education Policy and 2010 Curriculum Document (Teacher 
Education): In this project Student Teachers will have to take three steps: 
Step 1: Locate on the Internet the 2009 Education Policy and the 2010 Higher 
Education Commission Teacher Education Curriculum. In small groups, read the 
specific policy guidelines formulated for teacher education and compare them with 
the Rationalization Study of  Teacher Education, May 2009, and the preface of  the 
new Teacher Education Curriculum, 2010. The following questions should guide the 
reading: 
• What aspects of  the three documents talk about the same issues and challenges  
 in education?
• What principles and strategies are suggested for improvement? 
• How are the new reforms substantiated? 
• In your view , what are the key guiding philosophical and psychological   
 thoughts that are informing the reform? 
Step 2: Talk to a veteran and a novice teacher and discuss your findings with them. 
Ask them the reasons for seeing or not seeing significant changes in education. 
Step 3: Share your findings with the small group and prepare a presentation for the 
larger group. 
2. Personal framework reflection paper
The PFR takes a reflective look into your educational memory (nursery to grade 12; 
14 years of  education) as a student, child, son, daughter, grandchild, and so forth. 
Revisit your past experiences and discuss how they affect you today with regard to 
your ability to be a problem solver and decision-maker. 
• When addressing problem-solving, how is your educational memory a part of   
 you today?
• How has your past affected the person that you are today and what implications  
 does this have for your present studies?
• How have your previous educational experiences or lack thereof  shaped you? 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
90
This paper requires an honest examination of  your past and the system of  education 
that you may have today and how it affects the entire curriculum you create and 
present to your students. 
The paper must be three to four pages in length.
3. Small group presentation on assigned topic 
Form groups of  three to four, with defined roles. Prepare a 30-minute interactive 
presentation with visuals or a PowerPoint presentation on an assigned topic, which is 
to be defined or described. Include relevant research. Discuss the topic’s implications 
for and potential impact on education. Multiple perspectives from key stakeholders 
should be presented. 
Possible topics: How has the education system in general and society in particular 
identified: 
• Bullying 
• The excessive use of  technology 
• High-stakes testing 
• Parental and community involvement 
• Standardized testing
Notes on teaching philosophical  
perspectives on education
By Dr Asif Khan and Naila Siddiqua 
What is philosophy and what is educational philosophy? 
To prepare for this unit, you will find the following websites helpful: 
What are the Philosophical Foundations of  American Education? by Paul A. Rodriguez 
(http://www .slideshare.net/par913/what-are-the-philosophical) includes many 
helpful sections, including a clear explanation of  the origins of  the word philosophy . It 
makes an argument for the study of  the philosophical foundations of  education. 
What are They Teaching in Pakistani Schools Today? by Pervez Hoodbhoy (http://www .
shiachat.com/forum/index.php?/topic/234920551-what-are-they-teaching-in-paki-
stani-schools-today/): In this opinion piece, a university faculty member deplores 
the state of  education in Pakistan’s public schools. He criticizes textbooks, curricula, 
examinations, and teacher education in recent years and offers suggestions. In an open 
chat forum, the article invites other opinions and responses.
Letter from Abraham Lincoln to his son’s teacher: This is a letter from a father that explains 
parental aspirations for the child (the reading is listed in Additional Resources at the 
end of  this document).
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
91
Additional resources
5
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
92
This section provides selected readings that faculty will find useful in preparing for 
sessions, as well as student readings. Teaching materials such as handouts or activities 
that require elaboration are also included. Intellectual property rights are respected 
throughout. All materials are either free-use or are used with the permission of  the 
author and publisher. In some cases, original pieces written specifically for this course 
are included. All readings and materials in this section are for classroom use and, 
unless otherwise noted, may be duplicated for distribution to Student Teachers. The 
materials in this document may not be used in other publications without securing 
permission for their use.
Abraham Lincoln’s letter to his son’s teacher* 
He will have to learn, I know , that all men are not just, all men are not true.
But teach him also that for every scoundrel there is a hero;
that for every selfish Politician, there is a dedicated leader…
Teach him for every enemy there is a friend,
Steer him away from envy ,
if  you can, teach him the secret of  quiet laughter.
Let him learn early that the bullies are the easiest to lick…
Teach him, if  you can, the wonder of  books…
But also give him quiet time to ponder the eternal mystery of  birds in the sky ,
bees in the sun, and the flowers on a green hillside.
In the school teach him it is far honourable to fail than to cheat…
Teach him to have faith in his own ideas, even if  everyone tells him they are wrong…
Teach him to be gentle with gentle people, and tough with the tough.
Try to give my son the strength not to follow the crowd when everyone is getting on 
the band wagon…
Teach him to listen to all men…
but teach him also to filter all he hears on a screen of  truth,
and take only the good that comes through.
Teach him if  you can, how to laugh when he is sad…
Teach him there is no shame in tears,
Teach him to scoff  at cynics and to beware of  too much sweetness…
Teach him to sell his brawn and brain to the highest bidders
but never to put a price-tag on his heart and soul.
Teach him to close his ears to a howling mob and to stand and fight if  he thinks he’s right.
Treat him gently , but do not cuddle him, because only the test of  fire makes fine steel.
Let him have the courage to be impatient…
let him have the patience to be brave.
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
93
Teach him always to have sublime faith in himself,
because then he will have sublime faith in mankind.
This is a big order,
but see what you can do…
He is such a fine little fellow ,
my son!
_________________________________________________________________
*This letter is in the public domain and may be found on several websites. It may be 
duplicated for class use. Submitted by: Dr Asif  Khan and  Naila Siddiqua.
Guide to philosophy on the Internet: 
 Ø http://www .earlham.edu/~peters/philinks.htm.
This website is no longer updated, but contains a wealth of  valuable information 
about philosophies that inform the foundations of  education.
The Council of  Learned Societies in Education. (1966). Standards for academic and 
professional instruction in Foundations of  Education Educational Studies, and Educational 
Policy Studies (2nd ed.). Retrieved from http://csfeonline.org/about/csfe-standards/ 
This website articulates the role of  the humanities and social sciences in the founda-
tions of  education. It promotes the idea that ‘good programme assessment requires 
informed judgment’. Standards are seen as important ways to help educators make 
sound judgments about programme quality . In discussing the role of  the humanities 
and social science, the Council states, ‘ As tomorrow’s educators are called upon to 
exercise sensitive judgments amidst competing cultural and educational values and 
beliefs, they will continue to need studies in the ethical, philosophical, historical, and 
cultural foundations of  education to inform their decisions.’
Standard I defines the Foundations of  Education as ‘a broadly conceived field of  
educational study that derives its character and methods from a number of  academic 
disciplines, combinations of  disciplines, and area studies, including: history , philos-
ophy , sociology , anthropology , religion, political science, economics, psychology , 
cultural studies, gender studies, comparative and international education, educational 
studies, and educational policy studies. As distinct from Psychological Foundations of  
Education, which rely on the behavioral sciences, these Standards address the Social 
Foundations of  Education, which rely heavily on the disciplines and methodologies 
of  the humanities, particularly history and philosophy , and the social sciences, such as 
sociology and political science.’ Interpretive, normative, and critical perspectives on 
education are described.  
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
94
Definition of education
By Don Berg, Founder: Attitutor Services
The definition of  education guiding mainstream schools today is that education is the 
delivery of  knowledge, skills, and information from teachers to students. While the 
. . . metaphor—education as a delivery system—sounds reasonable, it misses what is 
most important about education. 
This mistaken idea of  what true education is and how it can be achieved is the root 
problem in mainstream education today . 
This conception of  education contributes to harming students and teachers by driving 
policy makers to insist on accounting for the ‘units’ of  information that students 
demonstrate knowledge of  on tests. 
The perceived need for mass scale standardized outcomes leads to a kind of  instruc-
tional bookkeeping that drives administrators to control teachers’ behavior, which in 
turn is directed to controlling students’ behavior in ways that increases symptoms of  
anxiety , depression, and other forms of  diminished psychological well-being. 
Student outcomes as measured by tests bear little relationship to true education, and 
so the instructional bookkeeping scheme is a failure even before the harm it causes is 
taken into consideration. 
Providing a proper definition of  education is complicated by the fact that there is not 
a clear consensus about what is important about being and becoming educated. For 
many people the importance of  education lies in future job prospects, for others it’s 
quality of  citizenship, and yet others just want literacy , critical thinking, and/or creativity . 
I propose that behind all the differences of  opinion about what it means to be educated 
is one very basic idea: an educated person is someone who perceives accurately , thinks 
clearly , and acts effectively on self-selected goals. A better understanding of  what 
education is, one that builds upon this idea, is crucial to enable people to reason about 
education productively . This will lead to more effective school reform programs and 
improve the everyday lives of  students and teachers. . . .
Critique of definition of education as delivery
My central criticism of  the definition of  education with the delivery metaphor is that 
children are being harmed by it. Ever since intrinsic motivation began to be studied 
in the 1970s, there has been an extraordinarily consistent result that students’ intrinsic 
motivation declines both within and across the K–12 years in traditional schools. 
Declines in intrinsic motivation are associated with increases in anxiety , depression, 
and other symptoms of  diminished psychological well-being. Declining intrinsic moti-
vation also indicates that schools have neglected to meet the basic psychological needs 
of  the children in their care since that is the cause of  declining intrinsic motivation. 
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
95
Using the metaphor of  delivery in our definition of  education, I would contend, is 
responsible for harm to students because the concept does not in any meaningful way 
indicate the importance of  taking the learner’s goals into account. The learner’s goals 
matter because one of  our basic psychological needs is autonomy; the sense that you 
have some influence or control over your own activities and experiences. 
The ways that schools impose standardized requirements currently ignores the goals 
of  those who are subject to the imposition. 
Professor Johnmarshall Reeve’s research has shown that teachers are exposed to mul-
tiple levels of  pressure to be controlling, the exact opposite of  autonomy supportive, 
which means that teachers are constantly encouraged to engage in harmful teaching 
practices. 
This leads to my further suspicion that teachers are also harmed by schools since the 
pressures for accountability applied by society presumably reduces their autonomy 
and the high turnover rate in the field may suggest a generally harmful situation that 
drives people away . 
Used by permission of  the author. For educational use only . For the entire article and 
a more complete discussion, the author’s website is 
 Ø www .teach-kids-attitude-1st.com/definition-of-education.html
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
96
Methods and 
strategies to use in 
teaching and 
learning this course
6
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
97
An array of  teaching-learning strategies has been included in this section to assist 
faculty teaching this course.
Active lecturing: An active lecture is not too different from any good lecture, but 
it attempts to involve listeners directly . There is no one best way to give an active 
lecture, but it includes the following:
Give information in small chunks (about 10 minutes), then have students do some-
thing with the information for 1–3 minutes. You can use the same activity after each 
chunk of  information is given or you can vary them. Examples of  activities are:
• Write a 1-minute reaction to what you have just heard. 
• Talk to the person next to you about what you heard versus what they heard.   
 Do you agree? Do you have questions? 
• List as many key points as you can remember.
Compare notes taken during the 10-minute chunk. Help each other fill in gaps or 
determine if  crucial information is missing. (Some people do not allow note-taking 
during the lecture, but this is up to the Instructor.)
Another way to give an active lecture is as follows: Hand out three colours of  cards 
or slips of  paper. When people are listening to your comments, have them hold up a 
different colour for:
• I understand 
• I don’t understand
• I disagree 
Then either stop and allow questions or adjust what you are saying so there are more 
‘understand’ colours showing. This is particularly effective with large groups of  50 or 
more people.
Ambassadors: This is a useful way to get groups or individuals to exchange informa-
tion. Two or more members move from one group to another to share and compare 
the group discussions, or you may wish to have half  the group exchange with 
another group. This is especially useful if  you do not have ample time for a full class 
discussion.
Brainstorming: This is a technique for getting creative ideas on a topic. It may be an 
individual activity or be organized as a group activity . Give people a limited amount 
of  time (e.g. a minute) to say or write down as many ideas as they can on a topic. 
No matter how unrelated an idea seems, write it down. (The teacher might also ask 
the whole class to brainstorm and write down all ideas on the class board.) After the 
brief  period of  brainstorming, ideas may then be analysed, organized, or critiqued. 
Brainstorming is often used as a problem-solving technique. Ideas are analysed in light 
of  how useful they might be in solving the problem. 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
98
Gallery walk: This is a strategy that borrows it name from a visit to the art gallery . 
Students walk through an exhibit of  posters, artefacts, or display items they have 
completed. They may or may not be directed to take notes. The idea is to thoughtfully 
look at what is displayed.
Graffiti wall: A graffiti ‘wall’ may be displayed in the classroom for use all term. 
Students may write down thoughts, feelings, or expressions before or following each 
session and sign their name. Anonymous comments are not suitable. Ideas generated 
in class may be posted on the wall. Use craft paper from a large roll or newsprint paper 
or join several cardboard boxes together to make a wall that can be stored between 
sessions. Students can take turns getting and putting away the wall each session.
Group work: There is no single best way to form groups. The best way for you is the 
way that suits your purpose. Use a more complicated strategy if  students need a break 
or need to be energized. Use a simple technique if  time is short. Some group-forming 
methods are as follows: 
• Ask people to count from one to five (depending on the number of  people you  
 want in a group). Appoint all the ones to go to one table (or area of  the room),  
 all the twos to a different area, and so forth, until the whole class is divided into  
 groups.
• Before class, determine how many people you want in a group or how many   
 groups you need. Use different-coloured stickers, stars or dots. Put one on each  
 student as they enter class. When it is time to form a group, ask students to find 
 people with the same sticker and sit together.
• Put different-coloured bits of  paper in a cup or jar on each table. Have people  
 take one and find people in the room with the same colour to form a group.
• Have students get together with everybody born in the same month as they were.
Make adjustments to the groups as needed.
KWL (Know–Want–Learn): KWL is a strategy that provides a structure for recalling 
what students know about a topic, noting what students want to know , and finally , 
listing what has already been learned and is yet to be learned. The strategy allows 
students to take an inventory of  what they already know and what they want to know . 
Students can create a chart on paper or the Instructor can draw one on a whiteboard 
(or blackboard), making sure to have three columns, with the headings K, W , and L. 
Students can categorize information about the topic that they expect to use as they 
progress through a lesson or unit.
Mini-lecture: A mini-lecture contains all the components of  a good lecture, and is 
sharply focused. It begins with an introduction that provides an overview of  what you 
will discuss. It makes one or more sharply focused points with an illustration of  each. 
It summarizes only the main point or points and then concludes. 
Minute paper: Ask students to write for a minute on a particular topic (it might be 
their reflections or you might assign a specific subject). They are to focus on writing 
down their ideas, rather than on proper grammar and spelling. A minute paper differs 
from brainstorming because there is more focus. 
COURSE GUIDE: Foundations of  Education
99
Pair-share: Use this technique when you want two people to work together to share 
ideas or accomplish a task. Simply ask people to work with someone next to them, 
or you can have them find a partner using some other criteria. It is very useful when 
you want people to quickly exchange ideas without disrupting the flow of  the class 
(sharing in triads or foursomes is another small-group technique).
Poster session: This is a useful way to have students organize their thinking on a 
topic and present it to others in a quick, but focused way . Have individuals or small 
groups create a poster to explain or describe something. For example, if  they have 
been doing an inquiry on a particular topic, they would want to include their focus, 
methods and outcomes along with colourful illustrations or photographs. The poster 
can be self-explanatory or students can use it to explain their work. As an in-class tool, 
a poster session is often combined with a gallery walk so that students visit a number 
of  posters in a short period of  time.
Readers’ theatre: This is a group-based dramatic reading from a text. The focus is on 
oral expression of  the part being read, rather than on acting and costumes. Readers’ 
theatre is a way to bring a text to life. Readers take turns reading all or parts of  a 
passage. It is a good idea to go over passages to be read aloud with students so they 
are familiar with any difficult words. Sometimes this method is used to get students 
interested in a text. They hear passages read first, then read the longer text. 
Roundtable technique: The class is divided into small groups (four to six) with one 
person appointed as the recorder. A question is posed that may have many answers, 
and students are given time to think about those answers. Afterwards, members of  
the team share responses with one another in a round-robin or roundtable style. The 
recorder writes down the answers of  the group members. The person next to the 
recorder starts, and each person in the group (in order) gives an answer until time is 
called. 
Text-against-text: This is a way of  helping students learn to analyse and compare 
written documents. The idea is to look at two documents and search for overlap, con-
firmation, or disagreement. It is a way of  looking at different perspectives. Sometimes 
it is useful to give students readings prior to class and ask them to compare the 
readings, following a set of  study questions. For example: 
1) Look at each author separately . What do you think the author’s main point is? 
2) How does the author support the argument? 
3) Look at the authors together. In what ways do they agree? 
4) What are their points of  disagreement?
5) What is your opinion on the issue? 
Text-against-text may be used to compare a new reading (or a set of  information) with 
a reading or information students have already discussed in another unit or earlier 
in the unit. In classrooms where the whole class uses a single textbook, Instructors 
often find they are teaching against what is in the textbook. Sometimes it is hard for 
students to accept that a textbook can and should be questioned. Putting together a 
text-against-text activity , using the textbook and an article or a set of  articles, can help 
them understand that there may be legitimate differences of  opinion on a subject. 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
100
Another way to use the activity is to put a set of  materials at each table or with each 
group of  students. Some university faculty like to put together text sets that include 
both scholarly and non-scholarly works and have students think about the differences. 
For example, you might provide all students – regardless of  their reading level or 
learning style – with a ‘way in’ to thinking about a topic by using some materials that 
are easy to read. Even competent adult learners seek out easy books or materials to 
learn about a new or complex topic. Providing a picture, newspaper article and chil-
dren’s book in a text set might give everyone a means of  connecting to or understand-
ing some aspect of  the larger subject. Articles need not contradict each other. They 
may be about the same topic, but offer students different ways of  seeing a subject.
Using quizzes or pop tests
Short quiz (15 min)
• Prepare and give a short quiz on the different aspects of  topics covered in the unit.  
• Have students take the quiz, then circle items about which they are unsure.
Triads share (10 min)
• Have students meet in groups of  three to go over items about which they are   
 uncertain. 
Review (30 min) 
• Go over the quiz with students, having them look at their own work and make  
 corrections. 
• Notice points they had difficulty remembering and take time to review them.   
 You may ask students to assist with this, sharing how they were able to  
 remember certain points.
• This is a time to correct any misconceptions.
• Have students save their quiz for future study .

