Methods of Teaching
COURSE GUIDE
Associate Degree in Education/
B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary
2012
semester     1
This product has been made possible by the support of the American People through the United States Agency for
International Development (USAID). The contents of this report are the sole responsibility of the authors, and do 
not necessarily reﬂect the views of USAID or the United States Government.
Technical Support: Education Development Centre (EDC); Teachers College, Columbia University
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
ii
Foreword
Teacher education in Pakistan is leaping into the future. This updated Scheme of  Studies is the latest 
milestone in a journey that began in earnest in 2006 with the development of  a National Curriculum, 
which was later augmented by the 2008 National Professional Standards for Teachers in Pakistan and 
the 2010 Curriculum of  Education Scheme of  Studies. With these foundations in place, the Higher 
Education Commission (HEC) and the USAID Teacher Education Project engaged faculty across the 
nation to develop detailed syllabi and course guides for the four-year B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary and 
two-year Associate Degree in Education (ADE). 
The syllabi and course guides have been reviewed by the National Curriculum Review Committee 
(NCRC) and the syllabi are approved as the updated Scheme of  Studies for the ADE and B.Ed. (Hons) 
Elementary programs. 
As an educator, I am especially inspired by the creativity and engagement of  this updated Scheme of  
Studies. It offers the potential for a seismic change in how we educate our teachers and ultimately our 
country’s youngsters. Colleges and universities that use programs like these provide their students 
with the universally valuable tools of  critical thinking, hands-on learning, and collaborative study .
I am grateful to all who have contributed to this exciting process; in particular the faculty and staff  
from universities, colleges, and provincial institutions who gave freely of  their time and expertise for 
the purpose of  preparing teachers with the knowledge, skills, and dispositions required for nurturing 
students in elementary grades. Their contributions to improving the quality of  basic education in 
Pakistan are incalculable. I would also like to thank the distinguished NCRC members, who helped 
further enrich the curricula by their recommendations. The generous support received from the 
United States Agency for International Development (USAID) enabled HEC to draw on technical 
assistance and subject-matter expertise of  the scholars at Education Development Center, Inc., and 
Teachers College-Columbia University . Together, this partnership has produced a vitally important 
resource for Pakistan. 
 
 
PROF . DR. SOHAIL NAQVI,
Executive Director,
Higher Education Commission,
Islamabad

HOW THIS COURSE GUIDE WAS DEV ELOPEDiii
How this course guide was developed
As part of nation-wide reforms to improve the quality of teacher education, the 
Higher Education Commission (HEC) with technical assistance from the USAID 
Teacher Education Project engaged  faculty across the nation to develop detailed 
syllabi and course guides for the four-year B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary and two-year 
Associate Degree in Education (ADE). 
The process of designing the syllabi and course guides began with a curriculum 
design workshop (one workshop for each subject) with faculty from universities 
and colleges and ofﬁcials from provincial teacher education apex institutions. 
With guidance from national and international subject experts, they reviewed the 
HEC scheme of studies, organized course content across the semester, developed 
detailed unit descriptions and prepared the course syllabi. Although the course 
syllabi are designed primarily for Student Teachers, they are useful resource for 
teacher educators too. 
In addition, participants in the workshops developed elements of a course guide.  
The course guide is designed for faculty teaching the B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary 
and the ADE. It provides suggestions for how to teach the content of each course 
and identiﬁes potential resource materials. In designing both the syllabi and the 
course guides, faculty and subject experts were guided by the National Professional 
Standards for Teachers in Pakistan 2009 and the National Curriculum 2006. The 
subject experts for each course completed the initial drafts of syllabi and course 
guides. Faculty and Student Teachers started using drafts of syllabi and course 
guides and they provided their feedback and suggestions for improvement. 
Final drafts were reviewed and approved by the National Curriculum Review 
Committee (NCRC).
The following faculty were involved in designing this course guide: Yasmin Junejo, 
GECE (W) Hyderabad; Sajida Aziz, GCEE (F) Pishin; Aroona Hashim, IER 
University of the Punjab, Lahore; Rashid Ahmad Noor, RITE (M) Peshawar; Fouzia 
Ghias, Fatima Jinnah Women University, Rawalpindi; Habib Elahi Sahibzada, Hazara 
University, Mansehra; Zakia Ishaq, GCEE (F) Pishin; Muhammad Akhtar, GCET (M) 
Faisalabad; Hamida Qadir, GECE (W) Hussainabad; Abdul Hafeez, GCET (M) 
Faisalabad; Syed Munir Ahmad, IER University of the Punjab, Lahore; Ziauddin 
GCEE Panjgoor; Saira Soomro, University of Sindh; Anila Aziz, GCET (W) DG 
Khan; Zia-ul-Rehman, GCEE Panjgoor; Muhammad Nabi Khan, GCE (M) Gilgit.
ivASSOCIATE DEGREE IN ED UCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEME NTARY
Subject experts guiding course design: Dr. Margaret Jo Shepherd, Teachers College, 
Columbia University; Hareem Atif  Khan, Consultant.
Date of  NCRC review: 3 March 2012 
NCRC Reviewers: Dr. Shagufta, Foundation University College of  Liberal Arts and 
Sciences, Rawalpindi; Dr. Javed Iqbal, Karakoram International University , Gilgit; 
Dr. Ishtiaq, Kohat University

T able of Contents
Syllabus  08
Unit Plans  21
 
UNIT 1  T eaching and learning school 24
 
UNIT 2  Classrooms are busy places 38
 
UNIT 3 T eacher-centred and student-centred methods 44
 
UNIT 4 Lecture, demonstration, discussion, questions,  
 and cooperative learning 50
 
UNIT 5 T eacher–student and student–student interactions  
 that support learning in the classroom 58
 
UNIT 6 Designing instruction: goals and objectives,  
 assessment, plans, and materials 65
 
UNIT 7 Self-regulated learning 72
 
Faculty Resources 76
 Handout 1, Unit 1: Summary of conclusions from teacher effectiveness research
 Handout 2, Unit 1: Principles and procedures of classroom observation 
 Handout 3, Unit 1: T eacher observation form
 Handout 4, Unit 1: Direct instruction
 Handout 5, Unit 1: Social constructivist learning theory
 Handout 6, Unit 1: Seven principles of learning
 Handout 7, Unit 4: Recitation and discussion require different questions
 Handout 8, Unit 6: Learning goals vs. activities and assignments
 Handout 9, Unit 6: The concept of formative assessment
Syllabus 
METHODS OF TEACHING 
COURSE SYLLABUS:  Methods of  Teaching
09
METHODS OF TEACHING
Year/semester
Year 1, semester 1
Duration (hours)
48 hours (16 weeks)
 
Credit value
3 credits
Prerequisites
None
Course description
This course is an introduction to teaching methods used in primary schools. 
Because you have been a primary school student, you will recognize some of  these 
methods. However, you know them from a student’s perspective rather than from a 
teacher’s perspective. 
Teaching methods are often divided into two broad categories: teacher-centred meth-
ods (also called direct instruction) and learner-centred methods (also called indirect 
instruction or inquiry-based learning). An effective teacher knows several methods, 
some teacher-directed and others learner-directed. From among these methods, a 
teacher selects the one method or combination of  methods most likely to achieve a 
particular lesson’s objectives with a particular group of  students.
Because teaching and learning interact, a course about teaching must also be about 
learning. The content and structure of  the course is based on two strong claims about 
learning. First, learning results from what a student already knows, thinks, and does – 
and only from these actions of  the student’s mind. A teacher enables students to learn 
by influencing what the student does to learn but the student has to do it. Second, as 
students progress through school they should learn to become their own teachers. 
That is, students should learn how to learn using their teachers as models.
Course outcomes
By the completion of  this course, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
•	 Describe and discuss their personal theory of  teaching and learning based on a  
 critical analysis of  implicit theories formed as Student Teachers.
•	 Summarize and debate the pros and cons of  teacher-centred and learner-centred  
 teaching methods and state their position as a teacher. 
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
10
•	 Make records of  structured, reliable classroom observations and draw conclusions  
 based on these observations.
•	 Participate in a cooperative learning group that plans, teaches, and critiques  
 a lesson. 
•	 Create and critique plans for teaching and learning in primary school classes.
Learning and teaching approaches
This is your first opportunity to study teaching and, to a lesser extent, learning in 
school. You will soon learn that there are several sources of  knowledge about teaching 
and learning, and you will be introduced to these sources. Because you have years 
of  experience as a student but are only beginning to study teaching, this course will 
provide you with the opportunity to experience school with a focus on the teacher. 
You will observe teachers at work in classrooms and interview two students in each 
classroom. You will start your student interviews with two primary school students 
and you will ask about their teachers outside the classroom. You will have a conver-
sation with at least two experienced teachers. You will participate in planning and 
teaching a lesson to your university classmates, and you will write a plan for a lesson 
appropriate for primary school students.
Experiences of  all types have more meaning when you reflect on the experience. In 
this context, reflection means turning your attention inward and searching for con-
nections between the experience you have just had and past experiences. You turn to 
your own thoughts, experienced as mental images and words, to discover what you 
have learnt through the new experience. Reflection is aided by writing about your 
thoughts and by talking about them with other people. This course is organized so 
that you complete many of  your assignments in collaboration with two or more of  
your classmates and you write three to five times a week in your journal. 
You are expected to be self-directed in this course. This means that you will arrange 
school visits and find teachers and students to talk with away from school. You also 
will take an active interest in your journal and use it for the purposes for which it is 
intended. Finally , you will be a responsible member of  any group of  classmates with 
whom you work. The value of  this course to your study of  teaching will be propor-
tional to the energy and time you invest in the course assignments.
COURSE SYLLABUS:  Methods of  Teaching
11
UNIT 1: Teaching and learning in school (2 weeks, 6 
hours)
Week # T opics/themes
1
Sources of  
information about 
effective teachers
Your experience as a student
Students currently in school
Published research 
Observations in classrooms
Reflections on classroom observation by yourself  and 
with others
Conversations with experienced teachers
Theories about education and instruction 
The relationship between teaching and learning
2
Sources of  informa-
tion about learning 
in school
Your experience as a student
Current students’ self-descriptions
Published research, especially in cognitive and educa-
tional psychology
Observations in classrooms
Reflections on student interviews by yourself  and with 
others
Conversations with experienced teachers
Theories about learning
Cultural influences on teaching and learning
Semester outline
You have been in school for at least 12 years. If  you are like other Student Teachers, 
you probably have a personal theory about teaching and learning that was formed 
by your experience as a student. You may not be aware of  all of  these thoughts and 
beliefs, but some of  them may interfere with learning to teach. In this unit, you will 
examine and write in your journal about your existing theory about teaching and 
learning so you become fully aware of  it. Then you will compare your personal 
theory about teaching with other perspectives on effective teaching. You may want 
to modify your theories. You will also learn how to observe teachers and students at 
work in classrooms.
1
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
12
UNIT 2: Classrooms are busy places (2 weeks, 6 hours)
Week # T opics/themes
3
Sources of  
complexity in the 
classroom
Managing a crowded space
Working with groups and individuals
Managing different activities occurring at the same time
Diversity among children
Managing scarce resources
Coping with unexpected events 
4 Managing 
complexity
Learn names, interests, and learning strengths fast
Establish rules and routines
Group students
Organize books and other materials for easy access
Create pairs of  students to help each other
Teaching is a universal human experience: parents teach their children; brothers and 
sisters teach each other; friends teach friends; employers teach employees; and col-
leagues teach each other. These examples of  teaching usually involve a few students 
at the most and occur in the setting where the learning is used. For example, young 
children learn about collecting water with their mother at a stream or well, or a child 
learns a new game from a group of  friends in a playground.
Classroom teaching is a special instance of  teaching. First, the group is large and diverse, 
which creates management challenges for the teacher. Second, learning takes place in 
an unnatural environment, which may create motivation and attention problems for stu-
dents. People who have not been responsible for teaching in a classroom have difficulty 
appreciating the complexity of  the work. The purpose of  this unit is to introduce you, as 
a prospective teacher, to the complex environment in school classrooms.
2
COURSE SYLLABUS:  Methods of  Teaching
13
UNIT 3: Teacher-centred and student-centred methods 
(2 weeks, 6 hours)
Week # T opics/themes
5 Key concepts
Distinction between lower- and higher-order learning
Outcomes from lower-order learning
Outcomes from higher-order learning
Instructional activities that enable lower-order learning
Instructional activities that enable higher-order learning
Direct instruction: a method to enable lower-  
order learning
Indirect instruction: a method to enable higher- 
order learning
Different roles for teachers and students
6 Model lessons
Template for direct instruction lessons
Sample lessons
Template for indirect instruction lessons
Sample lesson
Inquiry-based, problem-solving, and project-basedlearn-
ing: are these the same or different?
Choice: teacher-centred, learner-centred, or both?
These two methods are a good place to start your study of  teaching methods because 
they are usually seen in opposition to each other, though they can be complementary . 
Teacher-centred direct instruction is used to help students acquire knowledge and 
skills. Student-centred  indirect instruction is used to help students understand the 
physical, social, and psychological world in which they live. In addition to different 
goals, the methods derive from different theories of  learning and employ different 
practices. This unit is organized around the view that both methods belong in schools. 
Knowing and understanding are different but related mental processes; each is a legiti-
mate goal of  schooling for all students.
3
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
14
UNIT 4: Lecture, demonstration, discussion, questions, 
and cooperative learning (3 weeks, 9 hours)
Week # T opics/themes
7 Cooperative 
learning
Peer teaching practice
Rationale for cooperative learning
Different models of  cooperative learning
Cooperative learning procedures
Incentive structure of  cooperative learning
Limitations of  cooperative learning
Checklists as assessment devices
8
Lecture, 
demonstration, and 
discussion
Reasons to lecture
Structure of  a lecture
Active lectures
Structure of  a demonstration
Characteristics of  good discussion
Purposes of  questions
Questions in lectures, demonstrations, and discussions
Wait time
9 Asking questions
Open and closed questions
Lessons taught in class
As the previous unit illustrates, the method or practice that a teacher chooses depends 
on the intended goals for a particular group of  students. Teachers have choices not only 
about teaching methods but also about how they group students for instruction: whole 
class, small groups, pairs, or individuals. A teacher’s decision about grouping is usually 
determined by a lesson’s goal or objective. For example, if  a lesson requires that every 
student in the class have information that is not easily accessible and requires interpre-
tation, the teacher will probably decide to construct a lecture followed by discussion, 
including questions, for the whole class. 
This unit has ambitious goals and complicated logistics. Each prospective teacher will 
be assigned to one of  six cooperative learning groups. Each group’s task is to create six 
15-minute lessons in total; each method (lecture, demonstration, or discussion) will be 
employed in two lessons. All six lessons will include questions. One person from each 
group will teach the lesson to the rest of  the class during the third week of  the unit (week 
9). Three class sessions will be devoted to the lessons (two lessons per day), leaving 15 
minutes for discussion of  the lessons and 15 minutes for continued study of  questioning 
strategies. The person playing the teacher from each group will be selected at random by 
drawing a name from an envelope at the beginning of  class on the day of  the lesson.
4
COURSE SYLLABUS:  Methods of  Teaching
15
UNIT 5: 
Teacher-student and student-student  
interactions that support learning in the 
classroom (2 weeks, 6 hours)
Week # T opics/themes
10
Constructive 
interactions 
between teacher 
and students
Respect
Credibility
Fairness (justice)
Trust 
Interest
Enthusiasm
Adaptive teaching
11
Constructive 
interactions 
between students
Cooperative working relationships are central
Examples of  cooperative working relationships
Feelings are the foundation of  thought
Importance of  trust and confidence
5
While studying unit 2 in this course, you had the chance to watch a teacher and 
students at work in two different classrooms and discuss the observations with your 
colleagues. Hopefully , you could see that classrooms are unusual social environments. 
One adult is expected to allocate limited resources (space, time, learning tools, and 
attention) equitably among approximately 40 students.
Students are expected to sit for long periods and pay continuous attention to their 
lessons. Each student’s competence is on public display all the time. The teacher is 
supposed to have eyes that rotate 360 degrees to know what each student in the class 
is doing most of  the time. In this unit you will learn that a teacher and students can 
turn an unusual social environment into an environment that supports learning. 
You and your partners will observe in two more classrooms during the next two 
weeks. In each classroom you will observe a teacher interacting with two students and 
those students interacting with each other. In each classroom the teacher will choose 
the students whom you will observe.
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
16
UNIT 6: 
Designing instruction: goals and objectives, 
assessment, plans, and materials (4 weeks, 12 
hours)
Week # T opics/themes
12
Sources of  
knowledge for 
designing lessons
Learning principles
Pakistan’s primary school curriculum
Definitions of  standards, goals, and objectives
Examples of  standards, goals, and objectives
Bloom’s Taxonomy of  Educational Goals and Objectives 
13 Assessment
Definition of  assessment in schools
Personal experience with assessment
Assessment practices in schools in Pakistan
Purposes of  assessment
Distinction between formative and summative 
assessment
Examples of  formative assessment
14 Instructional 
materials
Sources of  instructional materials, including textbooks, 
in Pakistan
School budgets for instructional materials
Low- and no-cost materials to supplement or substitute 
for materials provided by the government
Examples of  materials created from local resources by 
teachers for mathematics, science, and literacy
15 Review and 
synthesis
Review of  teaching methods and instructional and 
learning principles
Review of  students’ current personal theories of  
teaching and learning
Search for synthesis 
Complete instructional design project (lesson plan)
Presentation of  lesson plans designed by students
6
Teachers started using learning objectives (also called learning outcomes) to design 
lessons about 50 years ago. Previously , lessons were named by the topic rather than 
a learning outcome. For example, a topic would be more general, such as ‘ Adding 
two-digit numbers’, rather than something specific, such as ‘ All students will correctly 
solve at least 8 out of  10 problems involving the addition of  two-digit numbers’. 
Teachers have more than one way to write learning objectives.
You have seen different formats for lesson plans, and some plans have more parts 
than others. Though there are differences in the number of  parts a plan may have, 
all lesson plans have objectives, or a sequence of  activities (and necessary materials) 
for achieving the objectives, and a means for collecting evidence that students have 
achieved these outcomes. In this unit, you will learn how to write learning outcomes 
COURSE SYLLABUS:  Methods of  Teaching
17
UNIT 7: Self-regulated learning (1 week, 3 hours)
Week # T opics/themes
16 Self-regulated 
learning
Becoming your own teacher
Parents and teachers attitudes towards self-regulated 
learning
Interdependence between learning and motivation
Intrinsic and extrinsic motivation
Mastery learning goals and performance learning goals
and to choose or create assessments. You will use knowledge you have acquired 
about methods to create and write a teaching plan. You will learn to find or create the 
materials that you need to use your plan. You will do some work on the lesson plan in 
class with the two people with whom you have visited schools. During the last week 
of  the unit (week 15) you will review what you have learnt about teaching methods 
and learning and instructional principles and then compare that knowledge with your 
current personal theories of  teaching and learning.
References
M. Boekarts, Motivation to Learn (Educational Practice Series No. 10) (Geneva: 
International Bureau of  Education, 2002.
 Ø http://www .ibe.unesco.org/en/services/online-materials/publications/educa-
tional-practices.html 
 
J. Brophy , Teaching. (Educational Practice Series No. 1) (Geneva: International Bureau of  
Education, 1999).
 Ø http://www .ibe.unesco.org/en/services/online-materials/publications/educa-
tional-practices.html
You know that learning is not confined to school. Children learn to walk and talk before 
they go to school. People continue to learn after they go to work. Ultimately , people 
learn throughout their lives. When you think about your own experience in school, you 
will probably also conclude that as you progressed through school, the work got harder 
and you had more responsibility for learning. (Learning in school can also be called 
studying.) The fact that learning is continuous in people’s lives is partly responsible for 
the belief  that children should ‘learn how to learn’ while they are in school.
The purpose of  this unit is to introduce you to the process of  learning how to learn. 
You will probably become aware of  mental actions that you take without thinking 
about them (e.g. ensuring that you understand what you are reading in preparation 
for a test.) As you study the unit, try to think of  yourself  both as a student (which you 
are) and as a teacher (which you are becoming) because you are learning about mental 
actions that you will teach your students.
7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
18
M. A. Dasgupta, Low-Cost, No-Cost Teaching Aids (New Delhi: National Book Trust, 
New Delhi).
 Ø <http://www .arvindguptatoys.com/arvindgupta/lowcostnocost.pdf>
M. J. Elias, Academic and Social-Emotional Learning. (Educational Practice Series No. 11) 
(Geneva: International Bureau of  Education, 2003).
 Ø http://www .obe.unesco.org/en/services/online/services/online-materials/publi-
cations/educational-practices.html
W . Harlan and J. Elstgeest, UNESCO Sourcebook for Science in the Primary School (Paris: 
UNESCO, 1973).
 Ø <http://www .arvindguptatoys.com/arvindgupta/unescoprimary .pdf  >
B. Rosenshine, Principles of  Instruction (Educational Practice Series No. 21) (Geneva: 
International Bureau of  Education, 2010). Available at:
 Ø http://www .ibe.unesco.org/en/services/online-materials/publications/educa-
tional-practices.html
UNICEF , ‘What Makes a Good Teacher? Opinions from Around the W orld’ (1996) <http://
www .unicef.org/teachers/teacher/teacher.htm>, accessed on 23 February 2013.
S. Vosniadou, How Children Learn. (Educational Practice Series No. 7) (Geneva: 
International Bureau of  Education, 2001).
 Ø http://www .ibe.unesco.org/en/services/online-materials/publications/educa-
tional-practices.html
West Virginia Department of  Education, ‘Examples of  Formative Assessment’, 
<http://wvde.state.wv .us/teach21/ExamplesofFormativeAssessment.html>, 
accessed 5 March 2013.
Grading policy 
A variety of  assessments should be used to assess Student Teachers learning. It 
is recommended that course work count towards at least 50% of  the final grade. 
Instructors will advise at the start of  the course about which pieces of  course work 
(assignments) will be graded. The remainder of  the grade will be determined by 
exams at the middle and end of  semester. 
COURSE SYLLABUS:  Methods of  Teaching
19
Course assignments
Reflective journal 
Each Student Teacher will need a spiral-bound notebook to use as a reflectiv
This journal will be used for specific assignments (e.g. development and cont
revision of  a personal theory of  teaching and of  learning) and for classroom 
vations. In sum, the journal will function simultaneously as a repository for c
e journal. 
inuous 
obser-
ertain 
assignments and as a diary for recording experiences connected with the course (e.g. 
classroom observations). Advise Student Teachers either to leave a wide margin when 
they write or to leave one side of  each page blank so that you can record your reac-
tions to their work and they can go back and record their own reactions to text they 
have written earlier (e.g. personal theory of  teaching and of  learning).
Classroom observations 
The course includes nine classroom observations. The course syllabus indicates that 
Student Teachers may have to locate the schools in which they will observe. If  the 
teachers approve, form triads among the class so that three people will observe in 
the same class at the same time. Each triad should remain together throughout the 
semester. Observing in triads has two purposes.
First, it allows for a richer conversation about the observation, and second, it 
allows the Student Teachers to talk about and reflect on teaching and learning with 
colleagues. Hopefully , this habit will extend to their teaching careers. Explain that 
observing and recording what they see is necessary but not sufficient. The value of  
the observations comes from talking and thinking about them. 
The nine observations are planned for units 1, 2, and 5. Each set of  observations has a 
different purpose. The first two observations are of  teachers’ actions during a lesson 
using a checklist created from research on teacher effectiveness. Two teachers are to 
be observed in different class levels (in classes 1–8) and different subject matters (e.g. 
maths, Urdu, science). The third observation is of  a teacher’s movement in the class-
room during a lesson. The fourth and fifth observations are in the same classroom 
and are of  a teacher interacting with two children, one who is academically in the top 
quarter of  the class and one from the bottom quarter. The remaining four obser-
vations occur in two classes, again with children of  varying ages and with different 
subject matters. Classes will be selected based on teachers’ selections of  two children, 
one of  whom is considered more popular and one who is considered less popular. 
Here the interaction of  the two target children with other children in the class will 
be observed. Each type of  observation (teacher alone; teacher–child interactions, 
and child–child interactions) requires data collection forms, the forms for which are 
included among the handouts.
Interviews with children
The course requires 10 interviews with children. The first interviews are with two 
primary school children who are to be asked their views about good teachers. Then 
each triad will interview four children (two high achievers and two low achievers) 
during lessons in classes where the first observation was conducted. Student Teachers 
will create their own interview questions. The purpose of  the interviews is to learn 
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
20
children’s opinions about school, the teacher, and of  themselves as students. The oth-
er four interviews are with two popular children and two less popular children, one of  
each from a different class. The interviewers will determine the questions, which can 
be the same as those used for the first set of  interviews. For each set of  interviews, the 
interviewers might consider asking each child, ‘If  you could change one thing about 
school and one thing about the teacher in the class we just visited, what would it be?’ 
Summaries of  these interviews, including the questions asked and interpretations, 
become journal entries. 
T eaching a lesson 
This assignment is described in the course syllabus. It is a group project, and its 
purpose is twofold: to plan and critique a lesson using a lecture, discussion, or demon-
stration and to work in a group using cooperative learning. 
Divide the class into six groups. Prepare six slips of  paper, two with ‘lecture’ written 
on them, two with ‘discussion’, and two with ‘demonstration’. Put them in a bag or 
envelope. Have one member from each group draw a slip from the envelope. The 
label on the paper indicates the method the group will use to build a lesson appropri-
ate for their university classmates. 
Each member of  the group will participate in planning the lesson as a cooperative 
learning experience. At the beginning of  the class session when the lesson is taught, 
the names of  that group’s members will be put in an envelope and one name will be 
drawn at random. That person will teach the lesson to the class. In other words, every-
one will need to be prepared to teach, though only one person will actually give the 
lesson. Student Teacher Groups will be given rubrics to evaluate the lesson. A critique 
will follow each lesson and will include group members who planned the lesson. Each 
group will be responsible for providing evidence that every member of  the group 
participated equally in preparing the lesson.
Designing a lesson
It may seem strange to plan and teach a lesson before learning how to design a lesson. 
This is a more detailed plan than the one used to teach using a lecture, demonstration, 
or discussion. It is hoped that using a simple plan involving one method will make it 
easier to create the more comprehensive plan.
This is also a group experience for triads. There may be some advantage in keeping 
the classroom observation groups together for this project. (There are also advantages 
to working with a new group.) The topic for the lesson is nutrition. The lesson is 
for children in class 4. It will be helpful if  you can find class-4 textbooks containing 
chapters on nutrition and put them on reserve for this course in the library . Student 
Teachers should also be encouraged to collect teaching materials for this assignment 
on their own.
COURSE SYLLABUS:  Methods of  Teaching
21
 UNIT PLANS      
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
22
General course notes to faculty
Five documents on learning and teaching commissioned by the International 
Academy of  Education in Brussels, Belgium and the International Bureau of  
Education in Geneva, Switzerland, both of  which are affiliated with UNESCO, are 
among the learning and teaching resources collected for this course. These documents 
are assigned to specific units in the course. The five documents are:
M. Boekarts, Motivation to Learn (Educational Practice Series No. 10) (Geneva: 
International Bureau of  Education, 2002.
 Ø http://www .ibe.unesco.org/fileadmin/user_upload/archive/publications/
EducationalPracticesSeriesPdf/prac10e.pdf
J. Brophy , Teaching. (Educational Practice Series No. 1) (Geneva: International Bureau of  
Education, 1999).
 Ø http://www .ibe.unesco.org/fileadmin/user_upload/archive/publications/
EducationalPracticesSeriesPdf/prac01e.pdf
M. J. Elias, Academic and Social-Emotional Learning. (Educational Practice Series No. 11) 
(Geneva: International Bureau of  Education, 2003).
 Ø http://www .ibe.unesco.org/fileadmin/user_upload/archive/publications/
EducationalPracticesSeriesPdf/prac11e.pdf
B. Rosenshine, Principles of  Instruction (Educational Practice Series No. 21) (Geneva: 
International Bureau of  Education, 2010).
 Ø http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0019/001906/190652e.pdf
S. Vosniadou, How Children Learn. (Educational Practice Series No. 7) (Geneva: 
International Bureau of  Education, 2001).
 Ø http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0012/001254/125456e.pdf
 Ø Alternatively , go to: www .ibe.unesco.org and search for the Education Practice Series.
In these unit plans you will notice that sometimes the text is written for the Instructor 
and at other times it is written for Student Teachers. There are two reasons for this. 
First, text that also appears in the syllabus is written for Student Teachers. Second, 
when text in session descriptions is written for Student Teachers, it indicates that 
they should do something. This is not an effort to control what you say to Student 
Teachers. It is a device to signal that they need to be told what or how to do some-
thing. It is one way , out of  many , that you might tell them how or what to do.
After the first unit, in which sessions are described, only two sessions are described in 
detail for each unit, as there is always more than one way to teach a lesson. Though 
the session descriptions read like prescriptions, they are not intended as such. The 
assumption is that one relatively detailed session as an example will stimulate your 
thoughts about other ways to conduct a class session. Please do not feel that you have 
to use the session descriptions included in these unit plans. Use them if  you choose. 
You know the subject and you know your students, so take these class sessions in the 
COURSE SYLLABUS:  Methods of  Teaching
23
direction that makes the most sense to you. This course will be revised based on your 
experience with it and student opinions. It will be helpful to the revision process if  
you record briefly (in a log) your decisions about how to conduct class sessions. If  you 
create your own plan for a particular session, describe it briefly in the log. If  you make 
a particular change(s) in the existing description of  a session, describe the change. 
Unit 5, Teacher–student and student–student interactions that support learning in 
the classroom, has an observation scheme (Handout 3 ‘Teacher Observation Form’). 
When you have a chance, it is probably wise review it and ensure that Student 
Teachers can do it. Simplify it if  necessary . 
When you reach Unit 7, Self-regulated learning, you will notice that the rationale for 
self-regulated learning, though complementary , is different in the unit description and 
in the Notes to faculty for week 16. In the unit description, the rationale is to prepare 
people to learn when they are no longer in school. It portrays a gradual increase in 
self-regulated learning as children progress through school. In the faculty notes, the 
rationale is that all learning is self-determined and self-regulated, which should be 
made explicit to help people become more effective and efficient teachers (of  them-
selves) from the time they enter school. In other words, teaching children to become 
their own teachers should be a major goal of  schooling. Ultimately , the difference in 
rationales is a difference of  emphasis, not a difference of  process.
‘Self-regulated learning’ may be a better phrase than ‘active learning’ to describe the 
student’s role in learning. If  you believe that learning is inferred from change in a 
student’s knowledge, skill, and attitude, then learning is by definition ‘active’ – and 
‘active learning’ becomes redundant.
There are two important concepts that have been intentionally omitted from Unit 7: 
metacognition and self-efficacy . If  you feel that was a mistake, go ahead and include 
these concepts in your teaching. However, these concepts will be introduced in the 
Educational Psychology course.
 UNIT     1  TEACHING AND 
 LEARNING SCHOOL
COURSE GUIDE : Methods of  Teaching
25
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Unit Overview
This unit has several purposes, including the following: 
•	 to orient Student Teachers to the functions of  a reflective journal and show   
 them how to organize it
•	 to initiate the process of  keeping a professional journal
•	 to introduce Student Teachers to the various sources of  knowledge about   
 teaching and learning
•	 to engage Student Teachers in the process of  selecting teacher actions to observe
•	 to learn procedures and principles of  classroom observation and  
 conduct observations
•	 to determine through discussion what their observational data say about the   
 presence of  actions associated with teacher effectiveness in the classes they observe
•	 to initiate discussion about the relationship between teaching and learning and  
 cultural influences on teaching and learning.
Learning outcomes for this unit
By the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will be able to the following:
 l reflect on their own learning about learning to teach
 l make entries into a professional journal
 l draw conclusions from the teacher effectiveness research and explain its limitations
 l conduct a simple structured classroom observation
 l summarize a simple set of  data from classroom observations 
 l list the seven important principles of  learning.
Unit resources
S. Vosniadou, How Children Learn. (Educational Practice Series No. 7) (Geneva: 
International Bureau of  Education, 2001).
 Ø http://www .ibe.unesco.org/en/services/online-materials/publications/educa-
tional-practices.html
West Virginia Department of  Education, ‘Examples of  Formative Assessment’
 Ø <http://wvde.state.wv .us/teach21/ExamplesofFormativeAssessment.html>,
accessed 5 March 2013.
26
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Handouts 
•	 Handout 1 ‘Summary of  Conclusions from Teacher Effectiveness Research’
•	 Handout 2 ‘Principles and Procedures of  Classroom Observation’
•	 Handout 3 ‘Teacher Observation Form’
•	 Handout 4 ‘Direct Instruction’
•	 Handout 5 ‘Social Constructivist Learning Theory’
•	 Handout 6 ‘Seven Principles of  Learning’
Week 1: Sources of information about 
effective teachers
Sub-topics
•	 Your experience as a student
•	 Students currently in school
•	 Published research
•	 Observations in classrooms
•	 Reflections on classroom observation by yourself  and with others
•	 Conversations with experienced teachers
•	 Theories about education and instruction 
•	 The relationship between teaching and learning
Week 1, session 1 lesson
T oday in class (5 minutes)
At a rapid pace, call on 12 Student Teachers at random and tell them to state the one 
thing about teaching that each most wants to learn. Move so quickly that they cannot 
deliberate about it. If  a Student Teacher hesitates, call on someone else. 
Introduce the course (2 minutes) 
Expanding on the course description, tell Student Teachers that this will be the first 
opportunity they have to study teaching. Remind them that though they have spent 
thousands of  hours in school as students, their beliefs about teaching remain unex-
amined. The intent of  this course is to help them think, write, and talk about these 
implicit beliefs and compare them against what they observe in classrooms. 
COURSE GUIDE : Methods of  Teaching
27
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Quick write (1 minute)
Give each class member an index card. When everyone has one, give them less than 
a minute to write on the card one thing about teaching that they most want to learn. 
Collect the cards and tally them later. This exercise is not precise, but it will force 
Student Teachers to respond with the first thing that comes to mind, and you may get 
a glimpse of  the knowledge they already have about teaching. Because the action in 
class is fast during these first few minutes, you should have their attention.
Review the syllabus (10 minutes)
Use the summary of  experiences they will have outside the university classroom in 
‘Learning and Teaching Approaches’ as the basis for this. Explain to Student Teachers 
that they have to make their own arrangements for classroom observations. Note that 
they will be given instructions about observation in classrooms. Invite questions. 
Explain the function and organization of the reflective journal (8–10 minutes)
This is important. Teaching Student Teachers how to reflect on experience and to 
establish the habit of  writing in a journal are two important goals of  this course. Use 
the description of  journal writing, specifically in reference to reflection, in the course 
assignments section in the course syllabus.
Writing (15 minutes)
Student Teachers will make their first entry about their existing personal theory of  
teaching in their journals
Pair-share (5 minutes)
Student Teachers will form pairs and share they believe is the most important point in 
their current theory of  teaching.
Closing (12 minutes)
Talk about homework assignments. Be sure that Student Teachers understand each 
assignment. Ask Student Teachers what they learnt in class today . Select a volunteer to 
answer. If  there is time, ask for other responses.
Week 1, session 1 homework
Instructions for Student Teachers
Activity 1: Write in your professional journal
Expand on your personal theory of  teaching in class. Have it prepared before the next 
class session.
Activity 2: Read ‘Summary of Conclusions from Teacher Effectiveness Research’ 
Write a two-paragraph summary of  the research and bring it to the next class. If  
there are individual words or teacher actions that you do not understand, make a note 
of  them in your journal so that you may ask questions later. Come to the next class 
prepared to discuss the research.
28
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Activity 3: Interview two primary school students about their views 
of good teaching
Among family and friends, find a student in a lower primary class (1–3) and a higher 
primary class (4–8), and ask each what they think makes a good teacher. Interview 
them individually and probe for several responses. Record their answers. 
Download ‘What Makes a Good Teacher? Opinions from Around the World’ from 
the UNICEF website (http://www .unicef.org/teachers/teacher/teacher.htm) and 
compare your students’ responses to responses from students all over the world. 
Write a two-page paper comparing your students’ responses with those from students 
from other countries. Most importantly , compare your students’ responses with your 
current personal theory of  teaching. Did they say anything that you might want to 
include in your theory? Bring your paper to the next class and give it to the Instructor.
Week 1, session 2 lesson
T oday in class (7 minutes)
This course is the first chapter in a story about learning to teach, and each class mem-
ber is the main character in his or her version of  the story . All stories share a common 
narrative theme: exploring teaching. To keep that narrative alive in Student Teachers’ 
minds, begin each class session with a brief  review of  the previous class and end each 
class with a review of  the class that has just finished. Ask for a volunteer to provide 
their recollections and give that person two minutes to speak. Ask if  anyone wants to 
add to the review . Choose no more than two and give them each one minute to speak. 
Tell Student Teachers that they are to leave their student interviews papers (previous 
session’s homework) on your desk at the end of  class. 
State the purpose of  this class session: to discuss the results of  the teacher effec-
tiveness research they read for homework (‘Summary of  Conclusions from Teacher 
Effectiveness Research’) and to create a list of  teacher actions associated with high 
student achievement to enter on the ‘Teacher Observation Form’. During week 2, 
the observation form will be used in two observations in nearby primary school 
classrooms in order to learn which of  these actions are taken by primary school 
teachers in Pakistan.
Preparation for small-group work (10 minutes)
Put Student Teachers in groups of  three. Tell them this is a permanent grouping for 
classroom observations. Ask if  there are pressing questions about the ‘Summary of  
Conclusions from Teacher Effectiveness Research’ they read for homework. Keep 
questions and answers brief. After answering questions, put one of  the actions from 
this sample list of  teacher actions on the board. 
COURSE GUIDE : Methods of  Teaching
29
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
•	 If  children do not learn, effective teachers change the lesson.
•	 Time in school is used for lessons, not for classroom management.
•	 Lessons proceed at a pace that holds childrens’ attention.
•	 The teacher moves continuously around the room to see each child’s work.
•	 Review is included in each lesson.
•	 The teacher assesses each child’s progress frequently .
•	 The teacher asks questions that require thinking.
•	 The teacher links new information to childs’ prior learning.
•	 The teacher builds learning in small steps.
•	 The teacher encourages children to take responsibility for learning.
•	 The teacher demonstrates skills to be learned.
•	 The teacher explains concepts.
Discuss the action you wrote on the board. Ask for a volunteer to contribute another 
action from the summary . List all contributed actions on the board. If  they are not 
suggested by Student Teachers, add the remaining actions on the list above. Shape 
answers into short declarative statements similar to those in the list of  actions above.
Give each group of  three Student Teachers, two copies of  the ‘Teacher Observation 
Form’ and tell them they will have 20 minutes to create one list of  10–12 actions on the 
form. Suggest that they start by discussing the summaries they wrote for homework. 
Small-group work (20 minutes)
Move from group to group as the Student Teachers work. Answer their questions, 
review the actions they have listed, and help them, if  necessary , revise statements of  
action that are too long or vague. If  a group is having trouble getting started, give 
them another prompt from the ‘Sample List of  Teacher Actions’, or ask someone in 
the group to explain an action in the research summary and help the group put that 
explanation into writing. If  the work is lagging in all groups, bring them back together 
and, working with what they have, help them construct one list. (Have chart paper 
taped to an appropriate wall surface in preparation for the next step in the lesson.)
Whole-class work (15 minutes)
Choose two Student Teachers to lead this step in the lesson: one will be a recorder and 
one will facilitate the presentations. One member of  each group will read that group’s 
list. The first list will be recorded on chart paper as quickly as possible.
Actions from the remaining lists will be recorded only if  an action has not already 
been read. However, the recorder will place a tick by each action as it is repeated 
by multiple groups. This will produce a frequency count of  the number of  times a 
particular action has been listed. 
30
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Closing (8 minutes)
Ask for a volunteer to summarize today’s work. Ask two more volunteers to indicate 
whether working with the teacher effectiveness research today altered their personal 
theory of  teaching. If  so, they should state how their personal theory changed. Tell 
Student Teachers to leave their summaries of  the teacher effectiveness research and their 
interviews with two children on your desk as they leave the classroom. Remind them to 
put their names are on both papers. Review today’s new homework assignments.
Week 1, session 2 homework
Instructions for Student Teachers
Activity 1: Professional journal work 
If  your interviews with children and your study of  the teacher effectiveness research 
raise questions or issues about your personal theory of  teaching, make notes to that 
effect in your journal. Think about those notes for two or three days before you 
consider making a change in your theory of  teaching. If  the interviews and research 
cause you to think that your theory may contain a misconception of  teaching, be sure 
to note that.
Activity 2: Interviews with two experienced teachers 
If  possible, return to the primary school you attended and identify two teachers 
with whom you want to speak. Ask them what they think makes a good teacher. 
If  they are available to talk with you separately , tell them that you have decided to 
become a teacher and are researching traits and actions of  teachers whose children 
learn well in school. As you did with the children, make notes of  their answers 
and then write a two-page paper reporting on their views of  good teaching. If 
you cannot get to your primary school, find two teachers among family , friends, 
or neighbours and interview them. (The interviews do not have to take place in a 
school.) Bring this paper to the next class. 
Activity 3: Read Handout 2 ‘Principles and Procedures of 
Classr
oom Observation’
Read this handout before the next class. You are going to conduct two classroom 
observations next week and you need to be prepared for them. Bring a list of  any 
questions you have about the information in the handout to class and be prepared to 
discuss the conduct of  an observation with your two partners.
Activity 4: Obtain permission to observe two teachers in a school 
near y
our home or university
If  you have to find classrooms to observe on your own, do that before the next class 
session. You will have to work with your two partners. Remember that you must have 
permission from the teacher and the school to do this. If  you need an official request 
from your course instructor, ask the school official if  you can bring it with you on the 
day of  the observations.
COURSE GUIDE : Methods of  Teaching
31
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
NOTE TO FACULTY: The lesson that you just taught illustrates an important point. As you are 
asking for volunteers to answer questions and participate in class activities, keep a record 
of which Student T eachers participate in each class session. This is important in order to 
ensure that every student in the class participates and that everyone is given that opportuni-
ty. Also, you can use class participation as one criterion for determining students’ grade.
When you read Student T eacher papers for this unit, try to identify potential connections 
between sources of knowledge about teaching and learning that the Student T eachers are 
exploring and their personal theories about teaching and learning.
Week 1, session 3 lesson
T oday in class (15 minutes)
Examine the list of  teacher actions that was compiled after the last class. Have that list 
pinned to a wall or on the board so that everyone can see it.
Remind Student Teachers that these are the actions they will look for from the teacher 
during next week’s observations. Ensure that Student Teachers understand everything 
on the list, and elicit and answer any questions they may have. Their observations 
can only be as accurate as their understanding of  the actions they are supposed to 
observe. As questions are raised by the class, turn to the rest of  the class and ask if  
another Student Teacher can provide the answer. Having Student Teachers answer 
each other’s questions may foster understanding more easily than if  you answer, 
though you will probably have to answer some questions. Tell the class that you will 
enter the list on the observation form, make copies, and give each of  them two forms 
in the next class.
Small-group work: studying the observation procedures (20 minutes)
Have Student Teachers sit in their observation group to discuss the procedures for 
next week’s observations. Check that they know how to use the observation form. 
They should describe its use one at a time to each other and the two listeners in each 
cycle should pay very close attention to their partner’s description. It is important to 
know that the observation interval is five minutes and that during that interval the 
observer needs to be mindful of  the full list of  actions. If  any of  those actions is seen 
within a five-minute interval, the appropriate box should be ticked on the same line 
as the action. No action should be ticked more than once in a five-minute interval. 
Remind Student Teachers that if  the teachers engage in very few actions on the list, 
they should note their observations on the back of  their form (or a separate piece of  
paper) and describe what the teacher’s actions during the lesson. The partners should 
also present each other with any questions about the observation they may have. 
Stop the group work after 15 minutes and tell each class member to write the list of  
procedures for conducting this observation in chronological order. 
Small-group work: memorizing the list of teacher actions (15 minutes)
Explain to Student Teachers that the hard part of  this observation involves watching 
the teacher teach and, at the same time, remembering to observe specific actions and 
to keep track of  time. This involves doing three tasks at once, which will tax their 
32
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
capacity for attention. Tell them that memorizing the list of  actions – along with key 
words – will help reduce the burden of  multitasking. 
Divide Student Teachers into groups of  three. Ask them to copy the list from the 
chart paper on the wall and to divide it into thirds. Each group member will work 
with one-third at a time. 
Ask each group member to memorize their third of  the list. When they think they 
have memorized it, they should ask the other two group members to test them. 
When they can remember all the items correctly three times, they should move on to 
the second and third set of  words and repeat the same procedure. 
If  time allows, group members should try to recall the complete list. 
Closing (10 minutes)
Ask for a volunteer to summarize the class session in two minutes. Ask for other vol-
unteers to indicate when they felt most engaged in the lesson and least engaged in the 
lesson. Each should take one minute. Explain to the class that two full class sessions 
will be devoted to classroom observations. Given the fact that there is so much to 
learn about teaching, two sessions may seem too much.
Explain that learning to observe teachers and students carefully is an important to 
learning the art of  teaching. Remind them that these observations are an important 
source of  knowledge about teaching and teacher effectiveness. 
Review the homework assignments. Return the papers submitted at the end of  the 
previous class and tell students to leave their papers reporting on their interviews with 
teachers on your desk as they leave the classroom.
Week 1, session 3 homework
Instructions for Student Teachers
Activity 1: 
Continue memorizing teac
her actions in preparation for classroom observation 
Using the memorizing routine, continue to study the list of  teacher actions on the 
‘Teacher Observation Form’. You may not achieve perfect recall during the observa-
tion, but you will find it easier to watch and record accurately at the same time.
Activity 2: Read Handout 4 ‘Direct Instruction’ and Handout 5 
‘Social Constr
uctivist Learning Theory’ 
You are studying sources of  knowledge about teaching and learning. In these two 
handouts, you will encounter another source of  knowledge about teaching and 
learning: theory . A theory is a system of  principles, ideas, or speculative thoughts 
intended to explain something. Read these two handouts and come to class prepared 
to thoughtfully discuss theory as a source of  knowledge about teaching and learning.
COURSE GUIDE : Methods of  Teaching
33
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Week 2: Sources of information about 
learning in school
Sub-topics
•	 Your experience as a student
•	 Current students’ self-descriptions
•	 Published research, especially in cognitive and educational psychology
•	 Observations in classrooms
•	 Reflections on student interviews by yourself  and with others
•	 Conversations with experienced teachers
•	 Theories about learning
•	 Cultural influences on teaching and learning
Week 2, session 1 lesson
T oday in class (5 minutes) 
Randomly select a class member and ask that person to give a two-minute summary 
of  the last class. Randomly select additional Student Teachers to describe (in less than 
a minute) the most valuable idea or skill learnt in the last class. 
Tell Student Teachers their reports of  conversations about good teaching with two 
teachers can be picked up from your desk at the end of  class. 
Remind Student Teachers that in this unit they are studying sources of  knowledge and 
beliefs about teaching and learning. The purpose of  today’s class is to explore theory as an 
influence on decisions about teaching. A theory is a system of  principles, ideas, or specula-
tive thoughts intended to explain instruction or learning. We will use direct instruction (an 
educational theory) and social constructivism (a learning theory) as examples. 
Assessing understanding of direct instruction (10 minutes) 
To start the exchange, discuss the key concepts in Handout 4 ‘Direct Instruction’ and 
ask a few questions. Hopefully , the questions will help Student Teachers think about 
the teaching practices this theory suggests. 
Key concepts of  this theory include knowledge as an external object acquired by the 
human mind, learning involves a change in observable behaviour, and learning is caused 
by teacher-controlled external events (refer to Handout 4 ‘Direct Instruction’).
34
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Ask the following questions to prompt class discussion:
•	 Who is responsible if  a student doesn’t learn?
•	 What happens to the student–teacher interaction if  a student doesn’t learn?
•	 What type of  learning outcomes is direct instruction most effective for achieving? 
•	 For which of  these teaching objectives might you use direct instruction: using  
 a microscope effectively , writing an original short story , building a winning   
 science fair project, distinguishing war from aggression, or typing at the rate of   
 25 words per minute?
Small-group work (15 minutes)
Assign Student Teachers to groups with five students each. Give them 10 minutes to 
discuss learning objectives that can be achieved through direct instruction and to write 
them down. After 10 minutes each group will report their conclusions to the rest of  
the class. Student Teachers will vote on the accuracy of  each objective in each group’s 
report by raising their hands. If  an inappropriate learning objective is reported, call on 
a student teacher from one of  the other groups to explain why that particular objec-
tive cannot be achieved with direct instruction.
Assessing understanding of social constructivism (10 minutes) 
To start the exchange, discuss the key concepts in Handout 5 ‘Social Constructivist 
Learning Theory’ and ask a few questions. Hopefully , the questions will help Student 
Teachers think about the teaching practices this theory suggests. 
Key concepts of  this theory include the mind constructs knowledge from experience– 
the mind does not acquire knowledge; children learn as a result of  interactions with 
other people; and other people can enable learning but the final responsibility for 
learning has to be assumed by the person who is learning.
Ask the following questions to prompt class discussion:
•	 Was Piaget a social constructivist? Explain your answer.
•	 What is the teacher’s role in a classroom guided by social constructivist   
 learning theory?
•	 How are questions used in classrooms that are governed by social constructivist  
 learning theory? (Though Student Teachers probably haven’t studied this   
 particular question, prompt them to answer by thinking about the issues rather  
 than drawing on knowledge.)
Small-group work (15 minutes) 
Repeat the same activity used in the direct instruction group work.
Closing (5 minutes) 
Give Student Teachers three minutes to write a paragraph summarizing today’s class. 
The summary should contain the main idea developed today , but they should not 
be a description of  what happened in class. The summary should try to capture the 
intellectual purpose of  the lessons.
The summaries should be left on your desk at the end of  the session.
COURSE GUIDE : Methods of  Teaching
35
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Read them between now and the next class. If  you find a few that capture the intellec-
tual content of  the lessons, remove the names, copy , and distribute them to all Student 
Teachers as a model of  a good class summary . If  you do not find a good one, write 
one yourself  and distribute to Student Teachers as a model. Remind them that they 
will make a classroom observation before the next class and to go to the school to 
observe. Review the homework assignments quickly .
Week 2, session 1 homework
Instructions for Student Teachers
Activity 1: Conduct two classroom observations in one school 
In one day , observe a lower primary school class and an upper primary school grade 
class. Make every effort to talk with the teachers you observe before you leave the 
school and ask them what they think makes a good teacher. Also talk with your two 
partners about the observations. Come to the next class prepared to present your data 
on the frequency of  each teacher action on the ‘Teacher Observation Form’. Add your 
three totals for each behaviour and divide the combined total by three. Bring your 
‘Teacher Observation Form’ to class along with any notes you made in conversations 
among yourselves and with the teachers you observed.
Week 2, session 2 lesson
T oday in class (5 minutes) 
Distribute the model summaries (or summary) from the last class session. Give 
Student Teachers two minutes to read them. Tell them that they will be asked to write 
a summary of  today’s class and the example summary should be used as a model. 
Today’s class has two purposes: to summarize data from their classroom observations 
and to give them time to write a personal theory of  in their professional journals.
Examining data from classroom observations (20 minutes)
Have charts posted on the wall or board so that they are visible to everyone. There should 
be two charts: one for the lower primary observations and one for the upper primary 
observations. Use these charts to tally frequencies of  occurrence for each action observed 
by each group. (Each group will present you with an average of  their observations.)
List the teacher actions on the ‘Teacher Observation Form’ on the left side of  each 
of  your charts. Draw horizontal lines between actions to create rows with one action 
per row . Create as many columns as there are groups of  observers. Label one chart 
‘Lower primary classes’ and the other ‘Upper primary classes’. Each group will give 
you the mean for each action for their three sets of  scores. Enter each group’s num-
bers for each action for the lower primary classes and the upper primary classes. Study 
the charts and look for the most and least frequently occurring actions. Look for 
outliers. Look particularly for classes where the most actions occurred. Theoretically , 
those should be the most effective teachers. Get the names of  those teachers and their 
schools. If  it is convenient, you may want to invite one or two of  those teachers to 
talk with the class. Save the charts, as you will use them again in the next class.
36
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Writing (20 minutes) 
Have Student Teachers write their current personal theory of  learning in their 
professional journal.
Pair-share (5 minutes) 
In pairs, have Student Teachers discuss their personal theories of  learning. They 
should identify what they believe is their most significant insight and whether the 
theory they wrote today has been influenced by experience in this course. If  so, have 
them explain how the course experiences have influenced their theory?
Closing (10 minutes) 
Tell Student Teachers to read the model summary (or summaries) of  the last class 
session given to them at the beginning of  today’s class. Give them four minutes to 
write a one-paragraph summary of  this class session. Remind them that they are not 
supposed to summarize by listing class activities; they are supposed to find the main 
point or the ‘big idea’ in the session and then identify how it was developed. Tell 
Student Teachers to leave their summaries on your desk as they leave the classroom.
Week 2, session 2 homework
Ask Student Teachers to come to class prepared to talk about your personal theory 
regarding how people learn.
Week 2, session 3 lesson
T oday in class (10 minutes) 
Return Student Teacher’s summaries from the previous class session. If  there were 
any good summaries, delete the names and distribute copies to all Student Teachers as 
models. Tell them that writing a good summary is both a significant skill and a learning 
strategy . Summarizing will help them understand and remember what they are learning 
in this course. Writing summaries of  class sessions will become standard practice in the 
course. Remind them that a good summary will identify the main point or ‘big idea’ of  
a class session and relevant supporting details. Tell them to read a model summary . Ask 
one of  the Student Teachers to identify the main point in the summary .
COURSE GUIDE : Methods of  Teaching
37
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Summarizing observational data (20 minutes) 
Return the charts from the last session to the wall so that everyone can see the data. 
Student Teachers will use this time in class time to get the data from the charts that 
they need to complete their homework assignment.
For homework, Student Teachers will write two one-page summaries: one of  the 
lower primary school data and one of  the upper primary school data. Their summa-
ries should include the most frequently occurring actions and the least frequently 
occurring actions. They also should include the number of  classes in which they saw 
five or more actions, what those actions were, and the number of  classes in which five 
or fewer actions were observed. If  there are differences in actions between teachers in 
the lower and upper primary classes, this should be noted. If  teachers used actions not 
on the ‘Teacher Observation Form’, this should also be noted. 
The point of  this exercise is to develop a snapshot of  primary school teachers’ actions 
when they use effective teacher research as a guide to teach. 
Small group discussion (10 minutes) 
Divide Student Teachers into groups of  five. Using Handout 6 ‘Seven Principles of  
Learning’, ask them to discuss the definition of  learning. Ask groups to list which 
aspects of  the principles they agree with, disagree with, or don’t understand. 
This list will become the basis for a third one-page paper.
Whole-class discussion (15 minutes) 
This is the first in a series of  discussions on cultural influences on teaching and 
learning in Pakistan. This topic is a thread that runs through the course. This first 
discussion is a response to the following questions:
•	 What do Pakistani parents want education to achieve for their children? 
•	 Do expectations differ from one subculture to another? 
Cite some of  the subcultures and their differences in expectations.
Closing (5 minutes) 
Student Teachers have 5 minutes to write a one-paragraph summary of  this class 
session. Tell them to leave their summaries on your desk as they leave the classroom.
Week 2, session 3 homework
Instructions for Student Teachers
Activity 1: Observational data 
Using the data obtained in class today , write two one-page papers presenting a snapshot 
of  teacher actions during lessons in a lower primary and upper primary classroom.
Activity 2: Contemporary definition of learning
Using the list created in class today , write a one-page critique of  the definition of  
learning that was discussed in your small groups.
 UNIT     2  CLASSROOMS ARE 
 BUSY PLACES
COURSE GUIDE: Methods of  Teaching
39
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Unit Overview
Teaching is a universal human experience: parents teach their children; brothers and 
sisters teach each other; friends teach friends; bosses teach employees; and colleagues 
teach colleagues. These examples of  teaching usually involve only one student or a 
few and occur in the setting where the learning is used. (For example, a child learns to 
use a cup or a spoon while eating.) Teaching in a classroom is different. First the group 
of  children is large, and each child is different from the others, creating management 
issues for the teacher. Second, learning takes place in small rooms where movement is 
restricted, creating motivation and attention problems for children. People who have 
not been classroom teachers find it difficult to understand that classroom teaching is 
hard work. The purpose of  this unit is to introduce Student Teachers to complexities 
of  classroom life. In the second week, the unit includes some ways that teachers 
manage a naturally difficult learning environment. (Remember, next semester Student 
Teachers take a course in classroom management.) The first week of  the unit focuses 
on the teacher’s attention to children, which is a scarce commodity that must be 
shared. The second week’s focus is on management techniques. 
Learning outcomes
By the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l cite reasons classrooms are difficult environments
 l understand why teachers need to move around the classroom during lessons
 l know how to record an interaction between a teacher and a child
 l know how to phrase directions to students in positive terms 
 l understand the importance of  grouping children and the various grouping   
 possibilities in a classroom
 l appreciate the value of  pairing children for learning. 
40
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 3: Sources of complexity in  
the classroom
NOTE TO FACULTY: This unit is intended to convey the message that, in many ways, 
classrooms are unnatural settings for learning. During the first week of the unit (week 3) 
Student T eachers are expected to spend two hours observing in classrooms. The first 
session of the week can be used for familiarizing students with the observation procedures 
and answering any questions they might have. The second session of the week can be 
used for reflection on the students’ own experience in school and the extent to which the 
features of classroom life listed below were characteristic of their experiences in school. 
If Student T eachers report a more positive environment for learning than the list below 
implies, they can be guided to hypothesize about reasons. Similarly, if their experiences 
were consistently negative, hypotheses about the reasons are equally important. 
The last session of week asks the Student T eachers to talk about and interpret their 
observations in the classroom. As in Unit 1, they should come to the third class session 
with a two-page summary and interpretation of their observations and the forms they used 
during the observations.
Sub-topics
•	 Managing a crowded space
•	 Working with groups and individuals
•	 Managing different activities occurring at the same time
•	 Diversity among children
•	 Managing scarce resources
•	 Coping with unexpected events 
Week 3, session 3 lesson
T oday in class (5 minutes)
Select a Student Teacher to give a two-minute summary of  the previous class. Ask if  
anyone would like to add to the summary . If  you get volunteers, choose no more than 
two and restrict their comments to one minute each. 
Tell the Student Teachers that they are going to note some generalizations about how 
the teachers they observed distributed their attention among their entire class. This 
will involve a whole-class discussion based on their classroom observations.
Choosing rules for today’s discussion (15 minutes)
Discussions are a useful means for integrating information from several sources. Good 
discussions don’t just happen; the participants have to work to have a good discussion. 
Let’s talk for a few minutes about characteristic of  good and bad discussions.
COURSE GUIDE: Methods of  Teaching
41
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Think for a minute about the best discussion you have ever had. What made the 
conversation so satisfying? Pause for a minute and then call on six or seven people 
to say what they think. Choose one student to write what each says on the board or 
chart paper.
Now think for a minute about the worst discussion you have ever had. What 
made that conversation so unsatisfactory? (Proceed as with the discussion on 
good conversations.)
Using the good and bad features of  discussion, guide the class to formulate four rules 
for today’s discussion.
Small-group work to prepare for discussion (15 minutes)
Put two triads together to create groups of  six. (It is hoped that the triads that 
observed together discussed their observations before they wrote reflective papers on 
the observations.) During the time allotted, the triads should compare the findings 
from their observations, look for common patterns and exceptions, and record them 
on chart paper and post when the small groups reconvene as a class. 
Whole-class discussion of results from observations (20 minutes)
Start this discussion with a sentence-completion exercise. Ask Student Teachers
 to complete the following sentences in writing:
•	 During these observations I was most surprised by…
•	 During these observations I was worried by…
Student Teachers will review the posters from the small-group work and ask any 
questions they have, including about the ‘Teacher Observation Form’. They will look 
for patterns in the information. For example, teachers in the lower primary classes are 
more inclined than teachers in the upper primary classes to move around the room 
so they know what all children are doing. Or, when teachers stay in one place in the 
room, children are less inclined to be attentive to the teacher. 
At this point ask four or five Student Teachers to read their completed sentences. If  
others want to read their sentences, honour their requests. Ask Student Teachers to 
talk about the consequences of  the teachers they observed paying more attention to 
high- performing children than to low-performing children. Bring the ‘surprised’ and 
‘worried’ comments into the discussion if  they are relevant.
Closing (5 minutes)
In five minutes or less, have Student Teachers write a summary of  today’s class. Have 
them leave their summaries on your desk.
42
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 4: Managing complexity
NOTE TO FACULTY: As noted in the introduction to the unit, this course is a story about 
the work of classroom teachers. As such, it can also be seen as an advance organizer 
for the teacher education curriculum in which students in the ADE/B. Ed. (Hons) degree 
programmes are enrolled.
For example, this unit is a narrow window on the knowledge and skills students will acquire 
in the Classroom Management course that they take next semester. In a limited way, last 
week’s sessions introduced Student T eachers to the fact that children are likely to get 
more attention from a teacher if they are in a class of 10 children rather that in a class 
of 40. This week’s sessions introduce Student T eachers to two of the many ways that 
effective teachers organize work in the classroom so children do learn. Because they have 
already seen how difficult it is for one adult to distribute attention equally among many 
children, week 4’s first session could be devoted to helping Student T eachers appreciate 
how important it is to know and remember important information about each child in order 
to show equal interest in each of them. Thinking about creative and effective ways to 
remember information about each child could be the purpose of the session. The second 
session of the week is about using clear, positive language when telling children what they 
are expected to do. It is difficult, especially for children in lower primary classes, to learn 
how to work in groups. The third session this week could be used to study and practise 
learning in pairs as a precursor to working in groups.
Sub-topics
•	 Learn names, interests, and learning strengths fast
•	 Establish rules and routines
•	 Grouping children
•	 Organize books and other materials for easy access
•	 Create pairs of  students to help each other
Week 4, session 1 lesson
T oday in class (10 minutes)
Choose a Student Teacher to summarize the previous class in two minutes. Ask if  
others would like to add to the summary . Choose no more than two Student Teachers 
and restrict their comments to one minute each. 
The purpose of  today’s class is to practise creating clear and positive statements when 
giving directions to children. Show Student Teachers what you mean by demonstrat-
ing how one might change a negative direction, such as ‘Don’t slam the door’ to a 
positive direction, such as ‘Close the door quietly , please’. Similarly , ‘Don’t yell out the 
answer’ might be changed to ‘Raise your hand if  you know the answer and wait until 
you are called to speak’.
COURSE GUIDE: Methods of  Teaching
43
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Pair work (15 minutes)
Have Student Teachers choose a partner. Together, they will brainstorm a list of  five 
or six negative statements. They should then convert these to positive statements.
Whole-class work (20 minutes)
Reconvene the class and have each pair write one positive direction on the board or 
chart paper. After the list of  positive directions has been completed, have Student 
Teachers read them, and ask if  anyone has a positive version of  a direction that uses 
better wording than the one posted. If  so, that person should write his or her direc-
tion next to the one already posted. That Student Teacher must also explain why the 
second direction is better than the first. 
The class will decide which is better and why .
Discussion (10 minutes)
When there is agreement on a list of  positive directions, lead a discussion on why 
positive directions are important. What are the consequences of  negative talk for 
children? What is the teacher trying to achieve by using positive talk with children? Do 
you think their parents try to avoid negative statements to them? If  so, do you think a 
teacher could influence parents’ language?
Closing (5 minutes)
Have Student Teachers write a summary of  this class session and leave it on your desk.
 UNIT     3 TEACHER-CENTRED AND  
 STUDENT-CENTRED METHODS 
COURSE GUIDE: Methods of  Teaching
45
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Unit overview
The distinction in teaching methods – teacher-centred versus student-centred – is a 
good place to start because these methods are usually seen as opposed to each other, 
though they can be seen as complementary . Direct instruction is used to help children 
acquire knowledge and action sequences (e.g. learning to write the alphabet). Indirect 
instruction, which involves inquiry-based, problem-solving, and project-based learn-
ing, is used to enable children’s understanding of  the physical, social, and psychological 
world in which they live. In addition to different goals, the two groups of  methods 
derive from different theories about learning and employ different practices. 
Both groups of  methods belong in schools, but acquiring and understanding involve 
different but related mental processes. Each is a legitimate goal of  schooling for all 
children. The purpose of  this unit is to illustrate differences between these methods 
and the theories of  learning from which they evolve. Student Teachers will compare 
lesson templates and study lesson plans for direct instruction and indirect instruction. 
They will be asked to determine whether these are oppositional or complementary 
methods. Student Teachers will also learn how to design teacher-centred and learn-
er-centred lessons. This is an introduction to this classification (Direct/Indirect) of  
teaching methods. 
Learning outcomes
By the end of  this unit Student Teachers will be able to:
 l name higher-order and lower-order mental processes
 l describe the learning theory that influences indirect instruction
 l describe the learning theory that influences direct instruction
 l explain key concepts of  direct instruction and indirect instruction
 l identify the instructional features of  direct instruction and indirect instruction
 l take a position as to whether these are oppositional or complementary methods.
46
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 5: Key concepts
Sub-topics
•	 Distinction between lower- and higher-order learning
•	 Outcomes from lower-order learning
•	 Outcomes from higher-order learning
•	 Instructional activities that enable lower-order learning
•	 Instructional activities that enable higher-order learning
•	 Direct instruction: a method to enable lower-order learning
•	 Indirect instruction: a method to enable higher-order learning
•	 Different roles for teachers and children
NOTE TO FACULTY: This unit has two goals: (i) to help student teachers see the distinction 
between lessons influenced by behavioural learning theory (direct instruction) and lessons 
influenced by cognitive learning theory (indirect instruction) and (ii) to help people learning 
to teach decide if teachers have to choose one method or the other. The task is first to 
help Student T eachers understand the difference between lower- and higher-order thinking, 
a distinction proposed by educational psychologist Benjamin Bloom, when he created a 
Taxonomy of Educational Objectives in the 1950s. Next help Student T eachers understand 
the differences between direct instruction and indirect instruction. Ask Student T eachers to 
decide if either theory/method is sufficient for mastering the primary school curriculum in 
Pakistan. The primary assignment in this unit can be a paper on this topic.
A formal definition of the two levels of thinking is included here to help make the distinction 
between them clear for the class.
Lower-order thinking occurs when students are asked to recall factual information or 
to employ rules and algorithms that have been learnt to mastery . Students are given 
specific knowledge that ranges from facts to complex concepts. The knowledge is 
conveyed through a text, lecture, worksheet, or other direct instructional activities. 
The meaning of  ‘instruction’ is to transmit knowledge or guide practice of  action 
sequences known to produce a specific and predictable outcome.
Higher-order thinking requires students to manipulate information and ideas in ways 
that transform their meaning and implications. This transformation occurs when stu-
dents combine facts and ideas in order to synthesize, generalize, explain, hypothesize, 
or arrive at some conclusion or interpretation. Manipulating information and ideas 
through these processes allows students to solve problems and discover new meanings 
and understandings. When students engage in the construction of  knowledge, an 
element of  uncertainty is introduced into the outcomes from instruction.
Some educators believe that most learning in school, especially by class 4, involves both 
lower- and higher-order thinking, which fall along a continuum in any given lesson or 
unit. That is, lessons start with experience that requires lower-order thinking to assure that 
children have the knowledge they will use to form generalizations and solve problems.
COURSE GUIDE: Methods of  Teaching
47
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
The first session for week 5 is outlined below . The second session can be used to study 
behavioural and constructivist learning theories and to identify differences between 
them. These two articles will help you prepare an active lecture on the theories.
G. Graham, ‘Behaviorism’, in E. N. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of  Philosophy 
(Fall 2010) <http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/behaviorism/>, accessed 5 March 2013.
This is a long article that contains more information than is needed for beginners. It is 
well written, though, and should be easy to abstract.
‘Constructivism Learning Theory’, Teachnology <http://www .teach-nology .com/
currenttrends/constructivism>, accessed 5 March 2013.
This is a long article, but it is a good reference that contains links to prominent con-
structivist theorists (Piaget, Vygotsky , and Bruner) as well as links to text on classroom 
applications of  constructivist theory . 
Week 5, session 1 lesson
T oday in class (10 minutes)
Choose a Student Teacher at random to summarize the previous class session in two 
minutes or less. Give two more Student Teachers one minute each to add to the first 
student’s summary . Discuss the importance of  summaries at the beginning and end of  
each class. Make sure the discussion addresses the following points:
•	 to learn how to summarize
•	 to keep the story theme of  the course (exploring teaching) in our minds
•	 to review what we have learnt in the course.
Lecture (25 minutes)
This lecture is about behavioural learning theory and, as indicated earlier, can be 
based on the Graham’s ‘Behaviorism’ (see this week’s Notes to faculty). After 10 
minutes, pause and ask two or three Student Teachers to summarize the important 
points about behavioural theory that you have made.
48
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
In-class writing (15 minutes)
Have each Student Teachers write a summary of  your lecture on behavioural learning 
and leave it on your desk before leaving the classroom.
Closing (5 minutes)
Call on a Student Teacher to summarize today’s class. Ask for two volunteers to add 
to the summary .
Week 5, session 1 homework
Give each Student Teacher a piece of  chart paper. Ask one half  of  the Student 
Teachers to draw a picture of  a classroom (with the teacher and children present) 
guided by behavioural learning theory . Ask the other half  of  the class to draw a 
picture of  a classroom guided by constructivist learning theory .  They should put 
as many indicators of  the theory in the picture as they can imagine. Compare the 
drawings in the next lesson.
Week 6: Model lessons
NOTE TO FACULTY: As indicated earlier, the main assignment for this unit can be a paper 
in which the Student T eachers describe their beliefs about the role of direct and indirect 
instruction in primary schools in Pakistan. This assignment would be appropriate for the 
end of week 6, and Student T eachers could have a week to complete it. It might be a good 
idea to have them write a draft in their journals before they produce the final paper.
Week 6, session 1 is described below . Sessions 2 and 3 can be devoted to studying 
lesson plans.
Week 6, session 1 lesson
T oday in class (5 minutes)
Rather than ask for a summary today , call on individual Student Teachers and ask 
each to name either a lower- or higher-order thinking skill. Designate which skill level 
you want selected Student Teachers to name. 
Show and tell: classroom drawings (10 minutes)
In 10 minutes, randomly select as many Student Teachers as you can to discuss their 
classroom drawing. Make sure that they point out the indicators of  behavioural 
learning theory in the classroom.
COURSE GUIDE: Methods of  Teaching
49
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Lecture (25 minutes)
Create this lecture based on the ‘Constructivism Learning Theory’ (see week 5’s 
Notes to faculty). Stop at least three times during the lecture and call on a Student 
Teacher to summarize the main points about constructivism you have identified.
In-class writing (15 minutes)
This is a summary of  your lecture on constructivist learning theory . Student Teachers 
can leave their papers on your desk as they leave the classroom.
Closing (5 minutes)
Rather than having Student Teachers provide a summary , ask Student Teachers 
different from those who participated at the beginning of  the class to name a lower or 
higher order thinking skill. Once again, you make the choice for them.
Week 6, session 1 homework
On the other half  of  the chart paper, Student Teachers will draw a classroom guided 
by constructivist learning theory . Again, remind them to put as many indicators of  the 
theory in the picture as they can imagine.
 UNIT     4 LECTURE, DEMONSTRATION,  
 DISCUSSION, QUESTIONS,
 COOPERATIVE LEARNING 
COURSE GUIDE: Methods of  Teaching
51
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Unit overview
As the previous unit illustrates, the method or practice that a teacher chooses depends 
on the goal for a particular group of  students.
Teachers have choices not only about teaching methods but also about how they 
group students for instruction. A teacher’s decision about grouping is determined by 
a lesson’s goal or objective. For example, if  a lesson involves every child in the class 
having information that is not easily accessible and requires interpretation, the teacher 
will probably decide to construct a lecture followed by discussion, including questions, 
for the whole class.
This unit relies on cooperative learning groups as the process by which a lesson using 
a particular teaching method (lecture, demonstration, or discussion) will be practised 
in class, with peers as students.
This unit has ambitious goals and complicated logistics. Each Student Teacher will 
be assigned to one of  six cooperative learning groups. Each group’s task is to create a 
15-minute lesson using one of  the methods in the unit title (lecture, demonstration, or 
discussion) for a total of  six lessons (two for each method). All six lessons will include 
questions. The teaching method will be assigned to the group, but the group will 
choose the topic of  the lesson. One person from each group will teach the lesson to 
the rest of  the class during the third week of  the unit (week 9 of  the course). Three 
class sessions will be devoted to the lessons (two lessons per day), leaving 5 minutes 
each day for discussions of  the lessons and 15 minutes for discussion of  questions 
regarding strategies. The group member who teaches the lesson will be randomly 
selected on the day of  the lesson; names will be drawn at random from an envelope 
containing everyone in the group’s name.
Learning outcomes
By the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l describe the purpose of  cooperative learning groups and the plan they followed to  
 achieve a learning goal by cooperative work
 l identify when to use a lecture, demonstration, or discussion to achieve a   
 learning  goal and describe the essential features of  an effective lecture,   
 demonstration, and discussion
 l differentiate a lesson where the teaching method is recitation from a lesson where  
 the teaching method is discussion, and produce illustrative questions for recitation  
 and for discussion
 l have a written record of  a lesson they produced in a cooperative learning group   
 that was either a lecture, demonstration, or discussion and that includes a peer   
 critique of  the lesson.
52
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
 Handouts 
Handout 7 ‘Recitation and Discussion Require Different Questions’
Week 7: Cooperative learning
Sub-topics
•	 Peer teaching practice
•	 Rationale for cooperative learning
•	 Different models of  cooperative learning
•	 Cooperative learning procedures
•	 Incentive structure of  cooperative learning
•	 Limitations of  cooperative learning
•	 Checklists as assessment devices
 
NOTE TO FACULTY: The use of peer teaching as a form of teaching practice has become 
more common recently in teacher education programmes around the world. This unit is 
an example of that practice. The methods of instruction to be practised are ancient, dating 
back to early Greek philosophers. Modern interpretations of the methods (e.g. active 
participation by students during a lecture) reflect contemporary learning theories that 
acknowledge learning as the student’s responsibility. This unit was structured to reflect 
another tenet of contemporary learning theories: the opportunity to learn can be enhanced 
by two or more students learning together. Week 7, session 1 is described below. Its pur -
pose is to explain the peer teaching process in detail and introduce cooperative learning 
as a group experience. 
Week 7, session 2 can be used to study cooperative learning; the most efficient way to 
cover this topic is with a lecture. The following website, designed for university faculty 
who teach geosciences, can inform your lecture: http://serc.carleton.edu/introgeo/
cooperative/index.html. Explore the links to find everything you need to know about 
cooperative learning. (If  this URL does not work, try typing ‘cooperative learning’ 
into a search engine to find similar pages.) 
Week 7, session 3 can be used to model how to create a checklist, as this will be needed 
during week 9’s peer teaching practice. Ask two Student Teachers to summarize for the 
class the essential features of  cooperative learning based on the lecture about the topic. 
All Student Teachers should take notes on each summary . Organize Student Teachers 
in small groups (three of  four Student Teachers per group) and have each group use 
their notes from the summaries to create a checklist for assessing individual and group 
performance during a cooperative learning activity . Have each group post their checklist 
on the wall or board, and as a whole class, create one list from the group lists. 
COURSE GUIDE: Methods of  Teaching
53
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Week 7, session 1 lesson
T oday in class (10 minutes) 
Ask a Student Teacher to give the name of  the previous unit. (This person may look at 
the syllabus for the answer.) State that the next Student Teacher will be asked to state 
the purpose of  the unit. Give the class a moment to reflect and then choose a Student 
Teacher to respond. (Answer: The purpose of  the unit was to learn the distinctive 
features of  direct and indirect instruction and to take a position on the role that these 
methods of  instruction have in primary school classrooms in Pakistan.) Ask if  anyone 
wants to add to the response. 
State that the next Student Teacher will be asked to state the main point of  the last 
class session in Unit 3. Give Student Teachers a moment to reflect and then choose 
someone to respond. (Answer: Effective teachers understand and have practised sever-
al methods of  teaching. They choose from one method or a combination of  methods 
that they believe is most likely to be successful for the lesson’s purpose and students 
characteristics.) Ask if  anyone wants to add to the chosen class member’s response. 
Preparation for small-group work (5 minutes)
Remind Student Teachers that direct and indirect instruction are comprehensive meth-
ods that are influenced by particular theories of  learning and by the belief  that mental 
processes can be classified as lower- or higher-order thinking skills. In this unit, you will 
cover teaching methods that can be classified as teaching strategies. Two of  the strate-
gies (lecture and demonstration) are means for transmitting declarative and procedural 
knowledge to children and one (discussion) is a means for developing understanding. 
Ask for an explanation of  the distinction between declarative and procedural knowl-
edge. (The class will first encounter this distinction in Unit 6 so help them if  they find 
the task difficult.) Assign Student Teachers to groups and ask them to think about 
their experience in school. Student Teachers should try to recall an interesting and 
effective lecture, a demonstration that produced the desired results, and a discussion 
in which their knowledge and/or attitudes changed.
Small-group work (15 minutes)
As Student Teachers discuss their experiences with lecture, demonstration, and 
discussion strategies, they should list the features they think made these particular 
experiences useful and memorable on chart paper.
Reports from small groups (10 minutes)
Have each group post their chart on the wall or board. The class should spend 10 
minutes reviewing each other’s chart, in particular looking for similarities. If  possible, 
leave the charts on the wall; at the end of  week 8, Student Teachers can then compare 
what they have learnt during the week with their thoughts and beliefs prior to study-
ing these three strategies.
54
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Learning about the unit project/assignment (15 minutes)
Assign the Student Teachers to one of  six groups in which they will work for the remain-
ing sessions in this unit. Put six pieces of  paper in an envelope; two each should be 
labelled ‘discussion’, ‘lecture’, and ‘demonstration’. Have one person from each group 
draw the group’s assignment (lecture, demonstration, or discussion) from the envelope. 
Explain that each group is responsible for the content of  the lesson and any instructional 
activity that the group thinks will enhance the lesson. They will have the remainder of  
week 7 and all of  week 8 to create the lessons, which should include questions. 
Be sure that Student Teachers understand that they are collectively responsible for the 
lesson, only one of  them will teach it – and that person will be chosen on the day of  
the lesson. The next class session will be devoted to the study of  cooperative learning, 
and group responsibility and individual responsibility within a group will be discussed. 
Finally , explain how this activity will be graded. Student Teachers will be graded by 
their peers using a checklist, and each group will be responsible for creating a check-
list for their group’s work. (They will practise creating checklists in the session 3 of  
this week.) All lessons can be taught during week 9. 
The class will probably have questions. Consider explaining that peer teaching practice 
is becoming increasingly popular in teacher education programmes. It lends itself  to 
reflective discussion because the ‘peer students’ are also learning to think like teachers.
Closing (5 minutes)
Ask one Student Teacher to summarize today’s session. Ask three Student Teachers to 
identify the most important fact, procedure, or concept learnt today .
Week 7, session 1 homework
Each group should have a meeting before the next class to select a topic for their 
lesson and discussing getting the resources needed to teach the lesson.
Week 8: Lecture, demonstration,  
and discussion
Sub-topics
•	 Reasons to lecture
•	 Structure of  a lecture
•	 Active lectures
•	 Structure of  a demonstration
•	 Characteristics of  good discussion
•	 Purposes of  questions
•	 Questions in lectures, demonstrations, and discussions
•	 Wait time
COURSE GUIDE: Methods of  Teaching
55
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
NOTE TO FACULTY: The purpose of this week’s sessions is to study characteristics of 
effective lectures, demonstrations, and discussions used in primary school classrooms 
and to give the class the opportunity to develop the lessons that they will teach next week. 
The preparation for next week’s lesson will involve both in-class work and homework. As 
the Instructor, you can decide where the work will be done or you might make that decision 
in conjunction with your class. Every time groups work on their lesson, they should com-
plete (and date) a copy of the ‘T eacher Observation Form’ to help their peers develop their 
teaching skills. They should submit these critiques along with the assessment checklists. 
Week 8, session 1 can be used to study the characteristics of  effective lectures, demon-
strations, and discussions. This work can be done in the small groups assigned to each 
teaching strategy , but then pair the groups so that they can create a common list of  
characteristics of  the effective teaching strategy . The paired groups can present their 
list of  effective characteristics to the class and each group’s list can be compared with 
the lists constructed prior to formal study in session 1 of  week 7. The homework 
assignment for session 1 is to read Handout 7 ‘Recitation and Discussion Require 
Different Questions’ and bring it to the next class. 
Week 8, session 2 is developed below . Handout 7 ‘Recitation and Discussion Require 
Different Questions’ provides the content for this session: the distinction between a 
lesson that is a recitation and a lesson that is a discussion. This distinction is important 
because recitations require lower-order thinking skills and discussions require high-
er-order thinking skills, and therefore, the two strategies produce different learning 
outcomes for children. In primary classrooms, recitations are more common than 
discussions. If  a society wants its teachers to teach higher-order thinking skills, it is 
important for teachers to understand the difference between recitation and discussion 
and to know how to facilitate meaningful discussions in the classroom. Having identi-
fied characteristics of  effective lectures, demonstrations, and discussions, the class will 
be ready to develop assessment checklists for their lessons in week 8, session 3.
Week 8, session 2 lesson
T oday in class (5 minutes)
Select a Student Teacher at random to review the characteristics of  effective discus-
sions. (Make sure the charts listing these characteristics are not in view .) Ask the class 
whether any characteristics are missing from their colleague’s review and, if  so, which 
ones. Once any differences of  opinion have been resolved, tell the class that today’s 
session will focus on differences between a recitation lesson and a discussion lesson.
Small-group work: questions in recitation lessons (15 minutes)
Using Handout 7 ‘Recitation and Discussion Require Different Questions’, the groups 
should discuss and agree on the purpose of  recitation lessons and then identify the 
characteristics of  questions asked in recitation lessons. For example, a teacher asks a 
question and one student answers it – like a fast-paced quiz show with only on correct 
(brief ) answer. Have Student Teachers review the fourth grade classroom dialogue 
(recitation lessons) about Androcles and the Lion and The Cay. They should discuss 
56
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
whether the questions in both dialogues are alike or different and then explain their 
reasoning. (Though the questions ask children to recall facts, they are different. In the 
Androcles recitation, questions are ‘what’ questions; in The Cay recitation, the ques-
tions are ‘why’ questions.)
In-class writing (10 minutes)
Working independently , each Student Teacher should answer to the question about 
the Androcles and The Cay recitations in writing. They should submit their piece at the 
end of  the writing period.
Small-group work: different purposes of recitation and discussion (10 minutes)
In small-group discussions, Student Teachers will focus on the different purposes of  
recitation and discussion. (You may give students the following hint to guide their 
discussions: recitations are called quiz shows; discussions are called conversations.)
In-class writing (15 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers, working on their own, to note down differences in questions 
asked during discussions and recitations. Give them 10 minutes to write, and then 
invite a few Student Teachers to share their ideas.
End this activity by explaining that a discussion is a mix of  questions and statements, 
usually in response to a significant question. Children are the dominant speakers in a 
discussion and ask each other questions rather than letting the teacher ask all of  the 
questions. Answers to questions are longer, and the pace of  a discussion is slower than 
for a recitation. Also, questions are open (more than one possible answer) rather than 
closed, as in a recitation.
Closing (5 minutes)
Call on three or four Student Teachers and ask each to tell the most important thing 
they learnt from this class session. Ask them to leave their second papers on your desk 
as they leave the classroom.
COURSE GUIDE: Methods of  Teaching
57
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Week 9: Asking questions
Sub-topics
•	 Open and closed questions
•	 Lessons taught in class
NOTE TO FACULTY: This is the week that Student T eachers teach their lessons to each 
other. Remember that the person responsible for teaching the lesson will be chosen by a 
drawing just before the lesson. Remind the class that everyone in the group will get the 
same grade. If the groups have prepared assessment checklists, have someone from 
the group presenting the lesson distribute the checklist before the lesson begins. Both 
examples of the same teaching strategy can be given on the same day. Each lesson 
should last 15 minutes, so there should be ample time following the lesson for the ‘peer 
students’ (i.e. the rest of the class) to complete the checklist and return it to the group that 
taught the lesson. 
As homework, each group should compile the results from their assessment checklists 
and write a one-page critique of  their lesson based on the checklists and their own 
assessment of  the lesson outcomes. This can be submitted at the beginning of  the 
next class session.
 UNIT     5 TEACHER-STUDENT AND  
 STUDENT-TEACHER  
 INTERACTIONS THAT SUPPORT 
 LEARNING IN THE CLASSROOM 
COURSE GUIDE: Methods of  Teaching
59
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Unit overview
This unit expands on the topics studied in Unit 2, when the idea that typical class-
rooms are not natural environments for learning was introduced. Student Teachers 
have had the opportunity to watch teachers and children at work in two different 
classrooms and discuss their observations with the teachers and their colleagues. This 
unit is a companion to Unit 2 and focuses on social interactions in the classroom, 
which differ from social interactions away from school. There are very few situations 
where one adult is supposed to simultaneously interact with approximately 40 children 
and give each child the same attention and interest. 
Unit 2 introduced to a few strategies that teachers use, such as grouping, to make it 
possible to work efficiently in a classroom. In this unit, the possibility that a teacher 
and children can turn an unusual and potentially difficult social environment into a 
comfortable, non-threatening social environment will be examined.
In the last unit, the focus was on cooperative learning, a group learning process in 
which Student Teachers participate. Although most of  the social skills are the same, 
there is a distinction between collaboration in the classroom and cooperative learning 
groups. Cooperative learning groups use collaboration to achieve particular academic 
goals. Collaboration is a social process that supports learning in the classroom in 
several ways and ideally continuously
Student Teachers will observe in two more classrooms during the next two weeks. In 
each classroom, observations will examine teacher interactions with all children in 
the class and then two children, chosen by the teacher, interacting (or not interacting) 
with each other. Student Teachers should pay particular attention to the teachers to 
see if  they interact with several children and if  they interact with each in a similar way . 
When Student Teachers watch children’s interactions with each other, they should 
look for signs of  cooperation and collaboration. They should make anecdotal records 
of  these observations. 
Learning outcomes
By the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l differentiate children’s collaboration in the classroom from working in   
 cooperative learning groups
 l provide examples of  teacher’s and children’s actions that illustrate respect and trust
 l compare the social realities of  observed classrooms with idealized accounts of    
 social interactions in the class readings
 l present recommendations for actions a teacher could take to improve   
 social interactions in classrooms where those interactions are not conducive  
 to learning
 l differentiate teacher–child social relationships in the classroom from relationships   
 that children have with other adults in their lives, especially parents.
60
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 10: Constructive interactions 
between teacher and student
Sub-topics
•	 Respect
•	 Credibility
•	 Fairness (justice)
•	 Trust 
•	 Interest
•	 Enthusiasm
•	 Adaptive teaching
NOTE TO FACULTY: This unit is based on the assumption that social relationships in the 
classroom are successful when a teacher is able to convince children that though he or 
she is in charge of the work in the classroom, is interested in them, and wants to work 
cooperatively. Also, social relationships in the classroom are successful when children are 
willing and able to work in collaboration with each other rather than by themselves or in 
competition with each other. 
The unit is organized so that discussions of these assumptions can be informed by read-
ings on the subject of social relations in classrooms and observations of social relations 
in classrooms. If possible classroom observations should occur by the middle of the first 
week so that what Student T eachers see and record in the classroom can be part of the 
discussion. Week 10, session 1 can be used to arrange a site and time for classroom 
observations and to learn how to conduct the observation. This session can also be used 
to learn about anecdotal records as an observation tool. Homework for this session can 
include making an anecdotal record of something that occurs at home. If family members 
are amenable and can act naturally, students might postpone their own meal, assume the 
role of an observer, and make an anecdotal record of the family’s actions and conversa-
tion at the dinner table. 
During session 2 of week 10, Student T eachers can prepare for their observations by 
discussing and deciding upon behaviours that indicate respect for another person. This 
can be done first in small groups and then through a whole-class discussion. The same 
can be done for behaviours indicating trust and showing interest in another person. It is 
important to agree on behaviour indicators for these concepts so that a discussion about 
them based on classroom observations is valid. Week 10, session 3 is described below. 
COURSE GUIDE: Methods of  Teaching
61
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Week 10, session 3 lesson
T oday in class (5 minutes)
This unit has more information, ideas, and recommendations for Student Teachers 
than can be covered in two weeks. Organize Student Teachers in their observation 
triads. One Student Teacher from each of  the triads will answer the survey questions 
about what they observed in the classrooms (discussed below).
Survey of observational data on teacher’s distribution of attention during
a lesson (2
5 minutes) 
Present the class with information about the survey they will take. It will cover teach-
er interactions with children during the observed whole-class lesson, which should 
have lasted 30 minutes. 
Ask the class series of  questions about their observation. The representative from 
each triad should raise his or her hand, as appropriate, in response to each question. 
(Record the numbers of  hands in the air for each question.) The questions should 
focus on how the teachers distributed attention among students during the lessons. 
Questions might include:
•	 Which of  you have data indicating that at least one of  the teachers you   
 observed interacted with at least half  the class during the lesson?
•	 Which of  you have data that at least one teacher interacted with fewer the one- 
 fourth of  the class during the lesson?
•	 Which of  you have data indicating that at least one teacher interacted with one  
 child five or more times during a lesson?
•	 Which of  you feel that at least one teacher was trying to distribute attention   
 equally among children?
•	 Which of  you feel that both teachers you observed were trying to distribute   
 attention equally among childr en?
Note the number of  hands raised in response to each question. Ask Student Teachers 
what conclusions can be drawn from the data presented.
Interpretation of the data on teachers’ distribution of attention during a
lesson (10 minutes) 
If  Student Teachers found that most teachers they observed made a genuine effort to 
interact with at least half  their children, ask them to speculate how they learnt to inter-
act in that way . If  Student Teachers found that most teachers they observed interacted 
with less than one-fourth of  their children, ask them to speculate on obstacles that may 
have prevented them from paying attention to a larger percentage of  the class.
In-class writing (15 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to write about the experience they had observing teachers 
interacting with children during a whole-class lesson. They should address whether 
their observations will influence the way they interact with children during practice 
teaching and, later, when they have their own class. If  so, what will the influence be? 
How will they make sure they remember this experience when as a teacher?
62
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Closing (5 minutes)
Ask three or four Student Teachers to identify the most important thing learnt this week.
Week 10, session 3 homework
Have Student Teachers write a report of  the classroom observation conducted this week. 
They should submit it at the beginning of  the next class session, with their observation data.
Week 11: Constructive interactions 
between students
Sub-topics
•	 Cooperative working relationships are central
•	 Examples of  cooperative working relationships
•	 Feelings are the foundation of  thought
•	 Importance of  trust and confidence 
Note to faculty NOTE TO FACULTY: The take-away message from this week’s sessions is that children, 
including those in class 1, can learn to work together and can be helpful to and supportive 
of each other to the mutual benefit of everyone, including the teacher. Children being able 
to work in small groups or pairs while helping each other is the key to a comfortable social 
environment in the classroom. As indicated earlier, this unit is based on the belief that 
cooperative learning groups and student collaboration (working together) are not identical 
processes, although they share many of the same goals and social skills. Cooperative 
learning groups are organized to achieve a particular academic goal. Collaboration is 
a continuous process intended to produce both joint actions (e.g. shared reading) and 
mutual support for individual actions. 
The challenge for this week’s lesson is helping Student T eachers identify behaviours and 
attitudes that collaboration requires. In week 11, session 1, Student T eachers observe each 
other. Create groups of six and have one person act as the observer. The observer will watch 
the rest of the group talking about the behaviour and attitudes that collaboration requires. If 
you choose to do this, make sure that each observer keeps a written record of the skills and 
attitudes they observe. Ask observers to compile a report back to the whole class. 
Week 11, session 2 can be used to review and consider the behaviours and attitudes identi-
fied through small-group work in the previous class session and to consolidate the groups’ 
work. Pair students together, ask four or five challenging questions, and have them practise 
working together using Think, Pair, Share. Think, pair, share is a relatively quick process: the 
teacher poses a question, individual students think about an answer, students pair up to 
share and improve their answers, and then they share their answer with everyone else. This 
method provides learners with an opportunity to test and improve an answer with a co-learner.
Student T eachers can also identify and create questions from an article or reading for 
homework. Pairs of Student T eachers should read the article and then create a set of 
questions based on it. In the next class, pairs can exchange articles and questions with 
each other. Student T eachers should then reflect on the collaborative nature of the activity.
COURSE GUIDE: Methods of  Teaching
63
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Week 11, session 3 lesson
T oday in class (5 minutes)
Collaboration means working together successfully . Studying collaboration is import-
ant because evidence indicates that classrooms where students take responsibility for 
teaching and supporting each other (with guidance from their teacher) are comfortable, 
pleasant places to work. There is also evidence that students in classrooms where collab-
oration is the norm achieve better test scores than those in non-collaborative classrooms. 
Collaboration requires some skills and attitudes that have to be learnt. This week’s aim is 
to identify the skills and attitudes that successful collaboration in the classroom requires. 
Review of the skills thus far identified (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to recall from memory the consolidated list of  skills and 
attitudes they believe collaboration requires and post them again on the wall or board. 
The list may include the following:
•	 attentive listening
•	 taking turns
•	 being patient
•	 asking for help if  you need it
•	 showing appreciation for others’ work
•	 knowing how to apologize
•	 doing your part
•	 knowing how to compromise
•	 speaking so that others can understand you
•	 trying to understand the feelings of  others
•	 keeping your attention on the work.
Keep the list in full view while Student Teachers report on their observations.
Examining the observation data (15 minutes)
Working from the data that Student Teachers brought back from the classroom 
observations, ask the class the following questions and invite Student Teachers to raise 
their hands in response:
•	 Which of  you saw 20 or more interactions between the child designated by the  
 teacher as popular and other children during the 30 minutes you observed?
•	 In what context did these interactions occur (e.g. playground, lunch room,   
 classroom)? (Select three Student Teachers who raised their hand to address  
 this question.)
•	 Were these interactions positive/negative/ mixed? (Ask separately so that there  
 is no confusion when Student Teachers raise their hands.)
•	 Which of  you saw any interactions between the child designated by the teacher  
 as isolated and other children? (As a follow-up, ask those who raised their hands  
 about the number of  interactions they saw , the context in which they occurred,  
 and whether those interactions were positive, negative, or mixed.)
64
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Ask one Student Teacher from each of  the triads to characterize briefly the social 
interactions of  children in the class in which they observed. They should address the 
following questions:
•	 Did children interact with each other a lot? Were the interactions mostly positive? 
•	 Did you see any actual acts of  collaboration (e.g. playing on the playground)?
•	 Did you see any skills in the interactions between children that are necessary   
 for collaboration?
Reflecting on your own experience with collaboration (10 minutes)
Working with their observation partners, ask Student Teachers to think about their 
own experience with collaboration (using among other experiences, the Think Pair 
Share experience during the previous class session the experience with cooperative 
learning in Unit 4) for the purpose of  identifying the skills and attitudes they think are 
important to collaboration.
In-class writing (15 minutes)
This writing assignment combines the interpretive paper about observations and 
the observation data with a one-page paper about Student Teachers’ reactions to the 
concept of  student collaboration in the classroom. Their papers should address the 
following questions:
•	 Are you persuaded that you can teach children to collaborate as the main   
 way to interact in the classroom and that the benefits will be a calm, comfort  
 able environment that will improve all childrens’ school achievement? 
•	 Do you think you might want to create a collaborative learning environment   
 when you become a teacher?
•	 Do you have any reservations?
Closing (5 minutes)
Ask four Student Teachers, chosen at random, if  they believe that a collaborative 
classroom environment is possible and desirable.
Week 11, session 3 homework
Have Student Teachers finish the paper that they started in class. It should be submit-
ted within the next week.
 UNIT     6  DESIGNING INSTRUCTIONS:
 GOALS AND OBJECTIVES,
 ASSESSMENTS, PLANS,
 AND MATERIALS
66
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit overview
Teachers started using learning objectives (also called learning outcomes) about 
50 years ago. Previously , lessons were named by a topic (for example, addition of  
two-digit signed numbers) rather than a learning objective (all students will correctly 
solve at least 8 of  10 problems involving the addition of  two-digit signed numbers).
Teachers have more than one way to write learning objectives. Probably , the most 
comprehensive approach to constructing learning objectives is found in an instruc-
tional design process called understanding by design, or backward design. This is a 
three-stage process that involves (1) the teacher writing learning objectives (knowl-
edge, skills, and understanding), (2) the teacher selecting procedures that will be used 
to obtain evidence that the objectives have been attained (assessment), and (3) the 
teacher writing an instructional plan. This process is assumed to be backwards from 
the way teachers normally design instruction.
In theory , objectives and assessments are written first, but teachers actually move back 
and forth between objectives, assessments, and a teaching plan as they design lessons. 
Understanding by design, or backward design, is not illustrated in this course because 
the back-and-forth nature of  the design process is confusing. When Student Teachers 
have had more experience with basic lesson planning, it will be easier for them to 
understand and evaluate a lesson (or lesson plan) based on backward design. 
This course has covered two different formats for lesson plans that derive from 
different theories about learning and instruction formats (direct instruction and 
indirect instruction). Although there are different lesson plan formats, all lesson plans 
have objectives, a plan for attaining those objectives (including the resources needed 
to teach the lesson), and the means for collecting evidence that students achieved the 
learning objectives. This unit includes supported practice for writing learning objec-
tives, creating assessments, and writing a teaching plan. 
Student Teachers will develop a lesson plan with their classroom observation triads. 
Some work will be in class and some will be done as homework.
During week 15, the last week of  the unit, Student Teachers will review what they 
have learnt about methods of  learning and instructional principles in the course and 
compare that knowledge with their personal theories of  teaching and learning held at 
the beginning of  the course.
COURSE GUIDE: Methods of  Teaching
67
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Learning outcomes
By the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l write learning goals for both knowledge and understanding that can be confirmed  
 through assessment
 l differentiate formative assessment from summative assessment and give two   
 examples of  formative assessment
 l describe how to create one example of  low- or no-cost instructional material.
 l be able to create a lesson plan that includes learning objectives, assessments, and a  
 teaching sequence
 l identify major changes in personal theories of  teaching and learning that occurred  
 during this course.
Handouts 
•	 Handout 8 ‘Learning Goals vs. Activities and Assignments’
•	 Handout 9 ‘The Concept of  Formative Assessment’
Week 12: Sources of knowledge for 
designing lessons
Sub-topics
•	 Learning principles
•	 Pakistan’s primary school curriculum
•	 Definitions of  standards, goals, and objectives
•	 Examples of  standards, goals, and objectives
•	 Bloom’s Taxonomy of  Educational Goals and Objectives 
68
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
NOTE TO FACULTY: The purpose of this unit is to give Student T eachers the opportunity to 
practise creating a lesson plan. At this stage, the plans they write will be underdeveloped 
and imperfect. This is to be expected. Good planning takes practice and Student T eachers 
are just beginning that process. 
Week 12, session 1 has two purposes: to introduce Student T eachers to the national 
curriculum and to Bloom’s T axonomy. First, the introduction to the National Curriculum 
(2006) and to Pakistan’s Learning Standards for Primary School Students will help Student 
T eachers understand the origins of required topics for which they must plan lessons. 
Second, the introduction to Bloom’s Taxonomy of Educational Goals and Objectives will help 
Student T eachers learn how to write learning goals/objectives. Student T eachers may write a 
lesson plan on a topic of their choice from the broad topic ‘nutrition’ in the class 4 General 
Science Curriculum. Approximately 25 minutes in class can be allocated to introducing 
Bloom’s T axonomy. The discussion should emphasize the difference between lower-order 
thinking skills (knowledge, comprehension, and application) and higher-order thinking skills 
(analysis, evaluation, and synthesis). Remind Student T eachers that they are supposed to 
write objectives that require both lower- and higher-order thinking skills. 
Try to obtain a copy of the General Science Curriculum, and using either transparencies 
and an overhead projector or a PowerPoint presentation, show the class 4 General 
Science Curriculum focusing on nutrition. Do the same for the Learning Standards for 
primary school children. 
Week 12, session 2 is described below.
Study the lesson plan formats and sample lesson plans from Unit 3 during week 12, 
session 3. Focus on the activities and materials that are the roadmap between objec-
tives and assessment. Notice whether a lesson has objectives and an evaluation plan. 
For those that do, critique these elements of  the plan.
Week 12, session 2 lesson
T oday in class (5 minutes)
Choose someone to give an oral summary about creating objectives, as covered in the 
last class session. Ask for additional contributions, but do not allow more than two 
Student Teachers to answer. Tell the class that they will be writing objectives for their 
lesson plans today . 
Practise distinguishing between goals and activities/assignments (15 minutes) 
Using transparencies and an overhead projector, complete the first three examples 
in Handout 8 ‘Learning Goals vs. Activities and Assignments’ as a class. Ask Student 
Teachers to explain their responses. Have the class work in groups of  four to complete 
the remaining examples. After they finish, review the answers as a class.
COURSE GUIDE: Methods of  Teaching
69
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Practise turning topic statements into learning goals (15 minutes)
Explain the importance of  being able to distinguish between topic statements and 
learning goals. Share a few examples of  topic statements and how they are different 
from learning goals. For example: 
•	 Student Teachers will be able to write learning goals for both knowledge and   
 understanding that can be confirmed through assessment. (a learning goal)
•	 Learning goals about knowledge and understanding (a topic statement)
Ask Student Teachers how these are different and which is the learning goal and why?
Invite the Student Teachers to work in pairs to create other examples. Move around 
the class to help them and discuss the examples they create. 
Writing learning goals for lesson plans (15 minutes)
Have Student Teachers organize themselves in triads to work on developing lesson 
plan. (They must choose a topic within nutrition for their lesson.) As a group, they 
will write two objectives (goals) that require lower-order thinking skills and two that 
require higher-order thinking skills for their lesson. 
Feedback on learning goals (10 minutes)
Call on two triads at random to read their learning goals. Ask for feedback from the class. 
If  the peer feedback is incorrect, amend comments so that Student Teachers stay on the 
right track. Have the triads to put their goal statements on your desk as they leave. 
Return the goals statements at the beginning of  the next class session so that Student 
Teachers can see areas that need improvement.
Week 13: Assessment
Sub-topics
•	 Definition of  assessment in schools
•	 Personal experience of  assessment
•	 Assessment practices in schools in Pakistan
•	 Purposes of  assessment 
•	 Distinction between formative and summative assessment
•	 Examples of  formative assessment
70
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
NOTE TO FACULTY: It is helpful to remember that students will take a full course on class-
room assessment in the fourth semester of the ADE/B. Ed. (Hons) degree programme. The 
purpose of the assessment component in this course is to introduce them to assessment 
practices in schools in Pakistan and particularly to the distinction between formative and 
summative assessment. Week 13, session 1 may include a practical definition of assess-
ment as it is used by teachers in their classrooms, reports from university students of their 
experiences, positive and negative, with assessments conducted in schools, and a survey 
of assessment practices in schools in Pakistan. 
Week 13, session 2 may focus on the distinction between formative and summative assess-
ments, with particular emphasis on the different purposes of the two forms. Understanding 
this difference is important for teachers, but it is not particularly easy to impart because 
most Student T eachers have only experienced summative assessments. It is worthwhile to 
spend an entire class session on this topic. It will be useful to distinguish between the two 
types of assessment, with summative assessment being an assessment of learning and 
formative assessment being an assessment for learning. Guide Student T eachers through 
examples to understand the meaning of this distinction.
Ask Student T eachers to read Handout 9 ‘The Concept of Formative Assessment’ in 
preparation for session 3. This handout contains information about different forma-
tive procedures, which they will create for their lesson plans. Week 13, session 3 is 
described below.
Week 13, session 3 lesson
T oday in class (5 minutes) 
Remind Student Teachers that they are going to create assessment procedures for 
their lesson plans today . Ask for a volunteer to state, in no more than three sentences, 
the difference between summative and formative assessment.
Group discussion: formative assessment procedures (20 minutes)
Lead Student Teachers in a discussion on different types of  formative  
assessment procedures.
Triads work to create assessment procedures for lesson plans (20 minutes)
Based on information from the reading and classroom discussion, the lesson plan 
triads from last week should review the feedback about their learning goals and make 
modifications as indicated. When they are satisfied with the way the learning goals are 
formulated, they can turn their attention to assessment and decide on an assessment 
procedure for each learning goal. They should consider the full range of  possibilities, 
from quizzes to performance measures.
Feedback on assessment choices (10 minutes)
Select two triads at random and ask a member from each to read their lesson’s four 
learning goals and the related assessment procedures. Invite peer feedback, though 
amend it as necessary . Tell the class to put their learning goals and related assessment 
procedures on your desk as they leave.
COURSE GUIDE: Methods of  Teaching
71
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Review each triad’s work and provide feedback. Return the work at the beginning of  
the next class session.
Week 14: Instructional materials
Sub-topics
•	 Sources of  instructional materials, including textbooks, in Pakistan
•	 School budgets for instructional materials
•	 Low- and no-cost materials to supplement or substitute for materials provided  
 by the government
•	 Examples of  materials created from local resources by teachers for mathematics,  
 science, and literacy
NOTE TO FACULTY: Week 14, session 1 can be devoted to an examination of textbooks. 
It will be helpful if Student T eachers have copies of class 4 general science textbooks to 
prepare their lesson plans. It will be helpful for them to learn how textbooks are created 
and distributed in Pakistan. They should also know how textbooks are coordinated with 
the curriculum. 
Week 15: Review and synthesis
Sub-topics
•	 Review of  teaching methods and instructional and learning principles
•	 Review of  Student Teacher’s current personal theories of  teaching and learning
•	 Search for synthesis 
•	 Complete instructional design project (lesson plan)
•	 Presentation of  lesson plans designed by Student Teachers
 UNIT     7 SELF-REGULATED LEARNING  
COURSE GUIDE: Methods of  Teaching
73
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6 UNIT 7UNIT 2
Unit overview
Learning is not confined to school. Children learn to walk and talk before they go to 
school. People continue to learn after they leave school and when they go to work. 
People learn throughout their lives. When you think about your experiences in 
school, you will probably also conclude that, as you progressed, the work got harder 
and you spent more time studying. (Learning in school can also be called studying.) 
The fact that learning is continuous in people’s lives is largely responsible for the claim 
that children should ‘learn how to learn’ in school.
The purpose of  this unit is to introduce Student Teachers to the process of  learning 
how to learn. During this discussion, Student Teachers will probably become more 
aware of  the mental actions that they normally do automatically (without thinking). 
For example, many likely pause as they are reading and preparing for an exam to 
ensure that they understand what they are reviewing. As the unit progresses, encour-
age Student Teachers to think of  themselves as both a student (which they are) and as 
a teacher (which they are becoming). The term self-regulated learning describes what 
is happening when students become their own teachers. To say this another way , 
self-regulated learning describes what is going on in the mind of  someone who is 
simultaneously a student and a teacher.
Learning outcomes
At the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l explain the differences between intrinsic and extrinsic motivation and between   
 mastery learning goals and performance learning goals
 l identify their personal motivational style
 l explain the interdependence between learning and motivation
 l identify six actions that characterize self-regulated learning.
Unit resources
E. Vockell, ‘Self-Regulation of  Learning’, Educational Psychology: A Practical Approach, 
<http://education.purduecal.edu/Vockell/EdPsyBook/Edpsy7/edpsy7_self.htm>, 
acced on 5 March 2013. 
The National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented, ‘Defining Self-Regulated 
Learning’, Self-Regulation <http://www .gifted.uconn.edu/siegle/SelfRegulation/
section2.html>, accessed on 5 March 2013.
74
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6UNIT 7 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 16: Self-regulated learning
Sub-topics
•	 Becoming your own teacher
•	 Parents and teachers attitudes towards self-regulated learning 
•	 Interdependence between learning and motivation
•	 Intrinsic and extrinsic motivation
•	 Mastery learning goals and performance learning goals
NOTE TO FACULTY: Learning is covert – without the help of medical technology, we do 
not have a window on what is going on in the brain. As such, it has been difficult, if not 
impossible, to develop a meaningful definition or description of learning. We judge that 
learning has occurred by observing that a person has new knowledge, new skills, and/
or different attitudes. Because learning cannot be directly observed and must be inferred 
from observable change, contemporary statements about learning describe it as change 
that is a gain (rather than as a loss). A person can do something or knows something 
today that that person did not know or could not do yesterday. 
As theorists began to think of learning as change, they noted that learning is a human 
activity that one person cannot do for another. A teacher can create favourable conditions 
for learning, but the learner learning has to enact the mental processes that make learn-
ing happen. If learning is a self-determined process, theorists reasoned, why not teach 
children how to do it when they start to school? This, briefly and somewhat primitively, is 
the reasoning behind psychologists and teachers interest in self-regulated learning. In 
one fashion or another, all learning is self-regulated, so let’s make self-regulated learning 
deliberate and systematic. This unit is an introduction to self-regulated learning. You will 
encounter the concept and teaching practices related to the concept in other courses in 
your degree programmes. Week 16, session 1 is described below.
Week 16, session 2 can be used to strengthen Student Teacher’s understanding of  
motivation. While most of  them undoubtedly know the difference between intrinsic 
and extrinsic motivation, the parallel concepts of  mastery learning goals and perfor-
mance learning goals will probably be new for them. You may want to distinguish 
between motivation, the desire to achieve a particular outcome or goal, and volition 
(i.e. the determination to achieve a particular outcome or goal). 
Week 16, session 3 can be used to study the ‘how’ of  self-regulated learning. What 
do Student Teachers need to learn to become their own teachers? The two Internet 
resources listed above are invaluable. If  there is adequate access to the Internet, you 
may want to assign reading at least one of  those sites as homework before this session.
COURSE GUIDE: Methods of  Teaching
75
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6 UNIT 7UNIT 2
Week 16, session 1 lesson
T oday in class (10 minutes) 
The previous class session was a review and summary of  the course. Having experienced 
that review , ask five Student Teachers at random to identify the one idea they encountered 
in this course that they believe will be the most helpful to them in the classroom.
Independent activity (10 minutes)
The purpose of  this unit it to study , talk, and think about self-regulated learning. Give 
individual Student Teachers 10 minutes to think and make notes about what they do 
when they are learning/studying. Their notes should address the following questions 
and the related actions they take:
•	 What is your mind doing when you are reading an assignment from a textbook? 
•	 What do you do when you are listening to a lecture? 
•	 How do you prepare to write a paper? 
•	 When you are reading, are you aware when you do not understand something?  
 If  so, what do you do? 
 
Small-group discussion (10 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to share their individual responses with each other.
Group reports to the class (10 minutes) 
Have one person from each group summarize and share the strategies suggested by 
the rest of  the group members. Listen in particular for reports on setting goals for 
study sessions and evaluating if  their goals have been achieved. Listen also for exam-
ples of  how Student Teachers monitor the success of  their self-study strategies and 
what they are doing if  they are not working.
Guided discussion of the interdependence of learning and motivation
(10 minutes)
Ask for a definition of  motivation. Scaffold it, if  necessary , and do not be too con-
cerned about precision. Work with the class to refine the definition in the next session. 
Ask how motivation and learning are related. The ideal answer is that they are interde-
pendent processes and cannot be fully understood apart from each other. If  necessary , 
guide the class towards this answer. Motivation leads to effort, which leads to learn-
ing and success, and learning leads to increased interest and increased motivation. 
Continue with this idea in the next session on motivation.
Closing (1 minute)
Demonstrate some motivational appreciation. For example, thank the class for their 
interest in today’s topic. You might choose to say something like, ‘I have learnt a lot 
from your ideas. I hope you will continue to learn more about how teachers motivate 
children, and I look forward to working with in the next session’.
Faculty Resources
HANDOUTS
FACULTY RESOURCES:  Methods of  Teaching
77
Handout 1, Unit 1 
Summary of Conclusions from T eacher 
Effectiveness Research
In the early 1970s, educational researchers interested in improving teachers’ per-
formance and students’ learning in school began studying the relationship between 
teachers’ actions in the classroom and students’ test scores. As a result, these research-
ers identified certain teacher actions that have a positive effect on test scores. This 
research is called ‘teacher effectiveness research’.
More recently , researchers have identified teachers’ actions that not only result in 
satisfactory test scores but also have a positive effect on school attendance, promotion 
to the next grade on time, on-time graduation, cooperative behaviour in school, and 
students’ beliefs that they can learn in school.
While teacher effectiveness research does not tell us all we need to know about effec-
tive teachers and satisfactory learning, it does direct our attention to teacher actions 
associated with test scores that are higher than in classes where teachers do not take 
these actions. Conclusions from the many studies of  teacher actions in the classroom 
can be summarized in different ways. One summary is provided here.
Goe, Bell, and Little evaluated the approaches used by effective teachers.1
•	 Effective teachers believe their students are capable of  learning and they can   
 teach them successfully . If  students do not learn from a lesson, these teachers  
 teach it again using a different method and sometimes different materials.
•	 Effective teachers organize life in the classroom so that time is used for learning  
 and students are not sitting at their desks with nothing to do, roaming around  
 the room, or chatting with another student.
•	 Effective teachers move through the curriculum at a pace that challenges   
 students to keep up but do so in relatively small steps to minimize frustration   
 and allow continuous progress.
•	 Effective teachers are active teachers in that they demonstrate skills, explain   
 concepts, design problems for students to solve, and review regularly . They   
 emphasize understanding and application of  knowledge. They provide ample   
 opportunity for practice. They encourage students to take personal responsibility  
 for learning. They move around the classroom continuously to maintain contact  
 with students.
For a student’s perspective on effective teachers, review ‘How Do We Value Teaching: 
Voices of  the Students’ by J. D. Greenberg.2
Read the article, and create a list of  actions deemed effective by students. 
You have now reviewed different perspectives of  teachers’ actions, both from classes 
in which students earn high test scores and graduate from secondary school. Read 
S
1 L. Goe, C. Bell, and O. Little, Approaches 
to Evaluating Teacher Effectiveness: A  
Research Synthesis  (Washington, DC:  
National Comprehensive Center for T eacher 
Quality, 2008).
2 J. D. Greenberg, ‘How Do We Value 
T eaching: Voices of the Students’, The 
National Teaching and Learning Forum, 
Supplemental Material , 8 (1999), 2–3. 
Available at www.ntlf.com/html/lib/sup -
pmat/82green.htm 
78
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
the lists again and create one list that includes all of  the actions, but do not repeat any 
action. Using the ‘Teacher Observation Form’ given to you by your teacher, create a 
checklist that you can use when you observe a teacher in a classroom.
Very important note to Student T eachers
From the point of  view of  Student Teachers, there are two important limitations 
to this research. First, both studies were conducted in schools in Western countries. 
However, the research is still relevant, as most of  the conclusions are consistent with 
contemporary research on learning and the results are believed to be universal to all 
human learning.
Second, all of  this research uses statistics that produce correlations. Correlations sim-
ply tell us that two events occur together. The statistic does not tell us that one event 
is causing the other to occur. As such, we know that students in classrooms where 
teachers engage in these actions earn higher test scores than students in classrooms 
where teachers do not engage in these actions. However, we do not know which, if  
any , of  these actions cause higher test scores.
As indicated earlier, findings from this research are consistent with evidence about 
some universal principles of  learning. If  you understand that the teacher actions 
summarized here are not causally related, you can use the research to guide your 
observations of  teacher actions in the classroom with confidence.
FACULTY RESOURCES:  Methods of  Teaching
79
Handout 2, Unit 1
Principles and Procedures of 
Classroom Observation
During the second week of  this course, you are required to observe two primary 
school classrooms. In each classroom, you will observe the teacher using a checklist 
of  teacher actions that you helped create. You must arrange the observations so that 
you are in the classroom when a lesson begins and stay there until it ends. One obser-
vation should take place in a lower primary school class (classes 1–3) and the other in a 
class with older students (classes 4–8). The lessons you observe must be from different 
school subjects. You should expect to conduct both observations in one day .
Teachers can be excellent sources of  learning, so you will observe in groups of  three 
and, hopefully , stay in the same group throughout the semester. This means that all 
three of  you will be watching the same lesson at the same time, and each of  you will 
be using your own form to record observations. You will need a watch for the obser-
vation unless the classroom has a wall clock.
‘T eacher Observation Form’
At the top of  the ‘Teacher Observation Form’, enter the date, your name, the class 
and subject you are observing, the number of  students in the class, and the time the 
lesson begins and ends. It will be helpful if  you also write the topic of  the lesson at the 
top of  the page and whether this is a whole-class or small-group lesson.
As the form indicates, you will observe in five-minute intervals. This means that 
during each five-minute period of  the lesson, you will look at the list of  teacher 
behaviours on the form (more about that later) and tick each behaviour you see. Make 
one tick per box. If  you do not see the behaviour, leave the box empty . 
Start the observation in first column, and every five minutes move to the next column 
until the lesson ends. If  a lesson ends in 15 minutes, you will mark three columns; if  
a lesson ends in 45 minutes, you will mark nine columns. The longer you observe, 
the more you will learn about the teacher’s actions. Try to observe lessons that last at 
least 25 minutes.
Adding teacher behaviours to the form 
‘Summary of  Conclusions from Teacher Effectiveness Research’ summarizes a large 
body of  research that documents teacher actions in a classroom that are associated 
with high student achievement. The purpose of  observing two classes is to give you 
a chance to see these actions in operation as well as other actions selected by the 
teachers you observe. 
Your job is to study the summary , make a list of  the behaviours based on the sum-
mary and the ‘Sample List of  Teacher Actions’, and enter that list on your form. You 
will receive guidance about this in class. The final decision about the entries on the 
list will be a group decision so that everyone in the class is observing with the same 
S
80
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
list. Write sentences that are short enough to fit easily into the spaces on the ‘Teacher 
Observation Form’.  You have 12 spaces but you do not have to use all of  them. (If  
the teachers you watch do not employ any of  the actions on the list or only a few of  
them, describe what they do on the back of  the form or a separate piece of  paper.)
Thinking about what you saw
Spend a little time talking with the teacher before you leave the classroom. In a very 
few minutes, you should find out about the teacher’s beliefs about effective teaching.
Then, find a quiet place where you and your partners can compare your forms and 
talk about what you saw . This is important because observation alone is not a very 
useful way to learn about teaching; thinking about what you have observed and 
discussing it with others helps you gain perspective.  
Make notes about your discussion because after the second observation, you will 
write a one- or two-page paper describing what you learned from these observations. 
Remember that this exercise is about observing teachers, not judging them. Teacher 
actions in this context are neither ‘good’ nor ‘bad’. This exercise simply involves 
watching what the decisions they make when they teach.
You have two partners and two classes in which you have been given permission to 
observe. You know when you must be in each classroom. You understand the obser-
vation form and have completed it with a list of  teacher behaviours to look for. You 
are ready to go. If  you can find a clipboard, take it with you. A clipboard will make it 
easier to fill out the form.
A few rules
Classrooms are busy places. Observers can distract the students and disturb classroom 
routine. Because there are three of  you there at one time, be very careful that your 
presence does not interrupt a lesson. If  you follow a few simple rules, you will be 
doing a favour for the teacher and students.
Before coming to the classroom to observe, talk with the teacher about where you 
should sit, how you will be introduced to the students, and what you should do if  
students try to talk with you when they should be paying attention to the lesson.
Do not initiate contact with students. This will be hard because they are curious and 
will be interested in you and you in them. It is very easy though to be drawn into 
long conversations and to be asked for help with a worksheet or other individual 
assignment. Private interactions between a student and an observer interfere with the 
teacher’s control of  the class.
Do not talk with your partners during a lesson or pass notes to each other. Also try not 
to make unexpected loud noises like scraping a chair across the floor or loudly ripping 
pages out of  a notebook. Have extra paper prepared if  you think it will be needed.
You will learn more about life in classrooms if  you get to see the classroom as it is 
every day rather than if  that natural state is disrupted by your presence.
FACULTY RESOURCES:  Methods of  Teaching
81
Handout 3, Unit 1
Five-minute periods
T eacher behaviours
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
T eacher Observation Form
Date     Observer
Class (1–8)    Start
Subject     End
Number of  students
S
82
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Observation notes
FACULTY RESOURCES:  Methods of  Teaching
83
Handout 4, Unit 1
Direct Instruction
Direct instruction is one of  several educational theories that provide knowledge about 
teaching. A brief  summary is included in this Unit to illustrate what people mean 
when they talk about educational theories. You will encounter this theory again later 
in this and subsequent courses.
Direct instruction is a theory of  education based on the assumption that the best 
way to teach is with scripted lesson plans that cannot be changed. Critics argue direct 
instruction gives total control of  lessons to the teacher. Students are not allowed to 
learn by exploration, and discussion is not included in the lessons.
Steps in a direct instruction lesson
Introduction/review. The first step is for the teacher to gain the students’ atten-
tion. Students are told what they will know or be able to do by the end of  a lesson 
and why the knowledge or skill is important to them. This step can be in the form of  
review and eliciting prior knowledge or it can be an introduction to new information.
Development of lesson. Once it is clear that students understand what they will 
have learnt from the lesson, the teacher should show them the learning outcome by 
modelling what they will know or be able to do. This step includes clear explanations 
and lots of  examples, both verbal and visual. It is a small lecture. The teacher contin-
uously checks for understanding by asking questions and encouraging students to ask 
questions if  they do not understand.
Guided practice. When the teacher is confident that students understand what they 
are expected to learn, they begin to practise under the strict guidance of  the teacher.
Closure. After a sufficient number of  error-free trials, the teacher reviews the lesson, 
including the learning outcome, and assigns independent practice worksheets. 
Evaluation. Student progress is assessed during the lesson and/or as a culminating event. 
For students who have not learnt the relevant information or skill, the lesson is repeated.
Although there are direct instruction lessons for reasoning and comprehension, this 
theory is most effective for learning basic skills in reading, mathematics, spelling, 
and handwriting.
S
84
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Handout 5, Unit 1
Social Constructivist Learning Theory
NOTE: This is a simple version of a complex theory that you will study in the Child 
Development course. It is included here because it is a prominent theory about how chil-
dren learn. Learning theories are one of the sources that teachers use to help them make 
decisions about teaching. Because you are studying those sources of knowledge, it is 
important for you to understand what people mean when they refer to ‘learning theory’. 
Social constructivism is just one of several theories (ideas) about how people learn.
Constructivism is the belief  that the human mind is active even at the time of  birth. 
All children, including newborns, want to understand what they see, hear, and touch. 
Their brains are actively trying to make connections between experiences.
Their first success, usually , is recognizing their mother’s face and voice. Think of  your 
own mind. Isn’t something happening there most of  the time? Think of  your mind 
while you are studying or trying to solve a problem in your daily life. Your mind is 
active; you are thinking. You aren’t just waiting for something to happen. The prin-
ciple here is that learning is the outcome of  a mind at work trying to make sense of  
experience. Jean Piaget was the first constructivist theorist. 
Social constructivism is a theory created by the Russian psychologist Lev Vygotsky 
(1896–1934). Vygotsky believed that children construct knowledge from experience, 
but he added another dimension to that theory . He believed that children learn 
through joint problem-solving experiences with someone who knows more than 
the child. He believed that children learn through interactions with other people. 
According to Vygotsky , all learning occurs through social interaction. The more 
experienced person is responsible for the child’s learning initially and then gradually 
steps back as the child assumes more and more responsibility for learning. The final 
responsibility for acquiring the knowledge and skills society views as important must 
be assumed by the child. However, other people start it with cues, prompts, models, 
explanations, demonstrations, and questions. 
S
FACULTY RESOURCES:  Methods of  Teaching
85
Handout 6, Unit 1
Seven Principles of Learning
NOTE: This handout complements Dr Stella Vosniadou’s booklet, How Children Learn. 
This handout highlights principles of learning whereas Dr Vosniadou combines principles 
with classroom recommendations. Consider reviewing How Children Learn as reference 
for teaching and to gain a better understanding of how to apply these principles.
‘Learning results from what the student does and thinks and only what the student 
does and thinks. The teacher can advance learning only by influencing what the 
student does to learn.’ 
–Herbert A. Simon, Nobel Laureate in Economics and a founder of  the field of  
cognitive science
Learning defined
Learning is a process, not a product. Learning involves change in knowledge, beliefs, 
behaviours, or attitudes. Change produced by learning has a lasting impact on 
how students think and act. Learning is not something done to students, but rather 
something students themselves do. It is a direct result of  how students interpret and 
respond to their experiences.
The seven principles
•	 Students’ prior knowledge can help or hinder learning.
•	 How students organize knowledge influences how they learn and apply what   
 they know .
•	 Students’ motivation determines, directs, and sustains what they do learn.
•	 To develop mastery , students must acquire component skills, practise integrating  
 them, and know when to apply what they have learnt.
•	 Goal-directed practice coupled with targeted feedback enhances the quality of   
 students’ learning.
•	 Students’ current level of  development interacts with the social, emotional,   
 and intellectual climate of  the course to impact learning.
•	 To become self-directed learners, students must learn to monitor and adjust   
 their strategies for learning.
S
86
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Handout 7, Unit 4
Recitation and Discussion Require 
Different Questions
Questions are a very common event in primary school classrooms. Observers in 
primary schools in some English-speaking countries have counted as many as 84 
questions, most asked by teachers, in one hour. There are estimates that as many as 
1000 questions may be asked in primary school classrooms in the course of  one day! 
Some of  these questions are procedural, such as ‘Did everyone bring their homework 
back to school this morning?’ However, most questions occur in lessons with learning 
goals as one of  two types of  teaching methods: recitation and discussion. 
You have already studied discussion as a teaching method. The purpose here is to 
contrast discussion with recitation. At first glance the two methods look quite simi-
lar – both involve talk between a teacher and students. But recitation and discussion 
have different learning goals and use different types of  questions. Both types of  talk 
between and among a teacher and students have their place in classrooms.
Recitation
Recitation is a way of  finding out what students know . The talk between a teacher and 
students is more like a quiz show than a conversation. The teacher asks a question and 
calls upon one student to answer. The teacher evaluates the answer and asks another 
question. Here is an example of  a recitation from a fourth grade class in which 
students are studying Androcles and the Lion, the story of  an escaped slave who earned 
a lion’s gratitude for removing a large thorn from one of  the lion’s paws:
Teacher: OK, let’s start from the beginning. What is the slave’s name?
Student 1: Androcles?
Teacher: Right. Now how was Androcles treated by his master?
Student 2: Cruelly .
Teacher: Good. So what did Androcles do?
Student 3: He escaped.
Teacher: Ah, yes. He escapes and heads for the forest. He is wandering around  
  and he meets a…a what, Jane?
Student 4: A lion.
Teacher: Yes, a lion. And something’s wrong with the lion. What’s wrong, Ari?
Student 5: He has a cut in his paw .
S
FACULTY RESOURCES:  Methods of  Teaching
87
Teacher: Not exactly a cut. Tasheika?
Student 6: A thorn is stuck in his paw .
Teacher: Absolutely . A thorn. And this moaning, whimpering, distressed lion  
  holds out his paw for Androcles and Androcles does what?
Student 7: Takes the thorn out.
Teacher: Right – and the lion is what, class?
Students:  (silence)
Teacher: How does the lion feel toward Androcles?
Students: (Students murmur a variety of  responses.) Grateful. Happy . Loving.  
  The lion likes Androcles.
This example of  a recitation illustrates that the talk with students is controlled by the 
teacher who asks the questions and evaluates the students’ answers. You can also see 
that the students’ answers are brief  (usually one word), and you can assume that the 
pace of  the lesson is fast. You can also see that each question has only one right answer.
Let’s look at a second example of  a recitation involving a book students are reading, 
The Cay. This one shows what can be done with recitation in addition to assessing 
students’ knowledge.
Teacher: Let’s review what you read last night. First of  all, what is a cay?   
  (One girl raises her hand.) Only one person? (A few more students   
  raise their hands.) Maggie?
Student 1: An island.
Teacher: Any particular kind of  island?
Student 2: A very small island.
Teacher: OK. Where is the island in our story?
Student 3: It’s near Aruba.
Teacher: Good. What else?
Student 4: In the Caribbean.
Teacher: OK. (The teacher tells students to locate the island on their individual  
  maps. When she is satisfied that everyone has located the island, she  
  continues.) This story takes place at what time in history?
88
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Student 5: 1942.
Teacher: Good. What important thing was happening then?
Student 6: It was the middle of  World War II.
Teacher: Where did most of  the fighting take place in World War II?
Student 7: Europe.
Teacher: OK, but are they in Europe?
Student 8: No.
Teacher: Then why is this little island in the Caribbean affected?
Student 9: It’s a world war so it affects lots of  places.
Teacher: True, but why this place?
Student 10:  Because there are three submarines there.
Teacher: But why?
Student 11:  Because of  a supply of  oil there.
Teacher: So what? Why is oil important?
Student 12: It’s worth a lot of  money .
Teacher: Why?
Student 13: Because it is rare and we need it.
Teacher: OK, it’s an important natural resource that’s not plentiful everywhere.
The teacher who taught this lesson acknowledges that it is a recitation rather than a discus-
sion and that it is controlled by the teacher. The class is preparing to discuss and critique 
a novel. In order to do that, the students need to have the story’s context. The teacher’s 
major goal with this recitation was to assure that everyone had the story’s specific back-
ground facts; this was done by asking the students questions rather than giving them those 
facts. The students’ answers also allow the teacher to know what prior knowledge students 
bring to their interpretation of  the novel and to correct any misconceptions they may have.
Discussion 
Discussion is a form of  verbal interaction in which students work together to consider 
an issue or a question. It is intended to stimulate a variety of  responses, to encourage 
students to consider different points of  view , to foster problem-solving, to examine 
implications, and to relate material to personal experience.
FACULTY RESOURCES:  Methods of  Teaching
89
The students whose discussion is excerpted below have just read Buford the Little 
Bighorn, a story about a little mountain sheep with huge horns that cause him consid-
erable trouble throughout the story . At the very end of  the story Buford discovers that 
his horns have some use after all. The students are discussing whether Buford will ever 
consider returning them to a normal size. 
Teacher: My ladies and gents, let’s review how to behave in a discussion. If    
  someone’s talking, we don’t cut them off, right? Raise your   
  hand and I will recognize you. Remember, you can’t just say , ‘I agree’  
  or ‘I disagree’. You have to be able to defend your answer. 
  What does that mean? Sheneika?
Student 1: You have to convince people you are right.
Teacher: OK, you have to give reasons why you think what you think. You   
  have to explain. Luis, you want to start us off, tell us what you think,  
  and give us some supporting argument
Student 2: Yes.
Teacher: Yes, should he get his horns trimmed? (Luis nods.) Why do you say yes?
Student 2: ‘Cause they are too long and if  he falls down he will get hurt.
Student 3: I disagree. In the story , when he fell, he ended up hanging on a tree.  
  So the horns helped him.
Student 4: I disagree ‘cause the horns made him fall in the first place. He should  
  take off  his horns so the hunters won’t get to him.
Student 5: I agree with Luis. If  Buford don’t get his horns cut, he’ll trip and get hurt.
Student 6: I agree with Luis, too. He’ll fall if  he don’t get them cut.
Student 1: I disagree, because Buford, when he was walking, he fell, and his   
  horns saved him.
Student 3: Yeah, and if  he get his horns cut off, then the folks from all   
  over the world won’t come and he won’t be a big star.
Teacher: Do you want to say something, James?
Student 7: I don’t want him to get his horns cut off  because then he won’t be   
  able to ski.
90
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
It is clear that these young students are just beginning to learn how to conduct a discus-
sion. You can still see differences from recitation, however. Students are the dominant 
speakers in a discussion. The dialogue is a mix of  questions and statements. The answers 
are longer and we assume the pace of  the discussion is slower than for recitation.
The purpose of  a discussion is to encourage students to think critically and consider 
different points of  view . There is no single right answer or conclusion. There can be as 
many conclusions as there are students as long as each conclusion has been explained 
and/or defended. Students participate in the evaluation of  answers and conclusions.
Recitation depends primarily on questions formed at the knowledge level of  the 
cognitive hierarchy while discussion depends on questions formed at higher levels of  
the hierarchy . Discussions can easily turn into recitations unless discussion-appropri-
ate questions (i.e. questions that elicit more than a yes or no answer) are used. The 
following questions types are appropriate for discussions:
Questions that ask for more evidence
How do you know that?
What does the author say that supports your argument?
Questions that ask for clarification
What do you mean by that?
Can you say that another way?
Hypothetical questions
What might have happened if  Joey hadn’t missed the bus?
Cause-and-effect questions
How might that rumour affect the school play?
Summary and synthesis questions
What did you learn from this discussion?
What is the most important idea that came from this discussion?
Resources
S. D. Brookfield and S. Preskill, Discussion as a Way of  Teaching (2nd edn.) (San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2005).
J. T . Dillon, Questioning and Teaching: A Manual of  Practice (New York: Teachers College 
Press, 1988).
C. S. Weinstein, M. E. Romano, and A. J. Mignano, Elementary Classroom Management: 
Lessons from Research and Practice (5th edn.) (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2011).
FACULTY RESOURCES:  Methods of  Teaching
91
Handout 8, Unit 6
Learning Goals vs. Activities and 
Assignments 
Following are statements from different subject areas. Some are more clearly learning 
goals; others are more clearly activities or assignments. After each statement, identify 
whether it is better classified as a learning goal or an activity or assignment. 
1. Students will be able to recognize the protagonist, theme, and voice of  a piece of  
literature. 
2. Students will produce a book report on a book of  their choice, including a table of  
contents, with proper pagination and format throughout. 
3. Given a set of  coordinates, students will be able to graph the slope of  a line. 
4. Students will compare and describe the slopes of  two lines. 
5. Students will understand the differences and similarities between metamorphic, 
igneous, and sedimentary rock. 
6. Students will understand how the Borgia family in_uenced the Renaissance. 
7. Students will be able to explain how the problems created by the French and Indian 
War contributed to causes of  the American Revolution. 
8. Students will produce a play dramatizing the problems created by the French and 
Indian War and how they contributed to causes of  the American Revolution. 
9. Students will understand that matter is made up of  atoms and that atoms, in turn, 
are made up of  subatomic particles. 
10. Students will write a paper describing the relationships among atoms and sub-
atomic particles. 
Designing and Teaching Learning Goals and Objectives © 2009 Marzano Research 
Laboratory	•	www .marzanoresearch.com
Visit www .marzanoresearch.com/classroomstrategiesthework to download this page.
S
92
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Handout 9, Unit 6
The Concept of Formative Assessment
ERIC Identifier: ED470206
Publication Date: 2002-10-00
Author: Boston, Carol
Source: ERIC Clearinghouse on Assessment and Evaluation
College Park, MD
While many educators are highly focused on state tests, it is important to consider 
that over the course of  a year, teachers can build in many opportunities to assess how 
students are learning are learning and then use this information to make beneficial 
changes in instruction. This diagnostic use of  assessment to provide feedback to 
teachers and students over the course of  instruction is called formative assessment. It 
stands in contrast to summative assessment that generally takes place after a period 
of  instruction and requires making a judgment about the learning that has occurred 
(e.g., by grading or scoring a test or paper). This article addresses the benefits of  
formative assessment and provides examples to support its implementation.
Purpose and benefits of formative assessment
Black and Wiliam (1998b) define assessment broadly to include all activities that 
teachers and students undertake to get information that can be used diagnostically to 
alter teaching and learning. Under this definition, assessment encompasses teacher 
observation, classroom discussion, and analysis of  student work, including homework 
and tests. Assessments become formative when the information is used to adapt 
teaching and learning to meet student needs.
When teachers know how students are progressing and where they are having 
trouble, they can use this information to make necessary instructional adjustments, 
such as re-teaching, trying alternative instructional approaches, or offering more 
opportunities for practice.
These activities can lead to improved student success.
Black and Wiliam (1998a) conducted an extensive research review of  250 journal 
articles and book chapters winnowed from a much larger pool to determine whether 
formative assessment raises academic standards in the classroom. They concluded 
that efforts to strengthen formative assessment produce significant learning gains 
as measured by comparing the average improvements in test scores of  the students 
involved in instruction that included formative assessment with the average improve-
ments in scores found for groups of  students receiving instruction that did not include 
formative assessment. Average improvements in scores were significantly higher for 
the groups whose instruction included formative assessment than for those groups of  
students who did not receive formative assessment.
Feedback given as part of  formative assessment helps students become aware of  any 
gaps that exist between their desired learning goal and their current knowledge, skill 
S
FACULTY RESOURCES:  Methods of  Teaching
93
or understanding and guides them through actions necessary to obtain the goal. The 
most helpful type of  feedback on tests and homework is specific comments about 
errors and specific actions to take to fix them. Comments encourage students to focus 
attention thoughtfully on the task rather than simply getting the right answer. It may 
be particularly helpful to lower achieving students because it emphasizes that students 
can improve as a result of  effort rather than be doomed to low achievement due to 
some presumed lack of  ability . Formative assessment helps support the expectation 
that all children can learn to high levels and counteracts the cycle in which students 
attribute poor performance to lack of  ability and become discouraged and unwilling 
to try to learn. 
While feedback generally originates from a teacher, students can also play an import-
ant role through self-assessment. Research shows that students who understand the 
learning objectives and assessment criteria and have the opportunity to reflect on their 
work show greater improvement than those who do not.
Examples of formative assessment
Since the goal of  formative assessment is to gain an understanding of  what students 
know (and don’t know) in order to make responsive changes in teaching and learning, 
techniques such as teacher observation and classroom discussion have an important 
place alongside analysis of  tests and homework.
Black and Wiliam (1998) encourage teachers to use questioning and discussion to 
increase students knowledge and improve their understanding. They caution, how-
ever, that teachers need to make sure to ask thoughtful, reflective questions rather 
than simple, factual ones and then give students adequate time to respond. In order to 
involve everyone, they suggest strategies such as the following:
•	 Invite students to discuss their thinking about a question or topic in pairs or   
 small groups, then ask a representative to share the thinking with the larger   
 group. (This is usually called think-pair-share.)
•	 Present several possible answers to a question, then ask students to vote on them.
•	 Ask all students to write down an answer, then read a selected few out loud.
•	 Have students write their understanding of  vocabulary or concepts before and  
 after instruction.
•	 Ask students to summarize the main ideas they have taken away from a lecture,  
 discussion, or assigned reading.
•	 Have students complete a few problems or questions at the end of  instruction  
 and check answers.
•	 Interview students individually or in groups about their thinking as they   
 solve problems.
•	 Assign brief, in-class writing assignments (e.g., ‘Why is this person or event   
 representative of  this time period in history?’
 
94
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
In addition to these classroom techniques, tests and homework can be used as forma-
tive assessment if  teachers analyze where students are and provide specific, focused 
feedback regarding performance and ways to improve it. Black and Wiliam (1998b) 
make the following recommendations:
•	 Frequent short tests are better than infrequent long ones.
•	 New learning should be tested within about a week of  first exposure.
•	 Be mindful of  the quality of  test items and work with other teachers and   
 outside sources to collect good ones.
Portfolios, or collections of  student work, may also be used formatively if  students 
and teachers annotate the entries and observe growth over time and practice.
This has been prepared for pre-service teachers. Black and Wiliam (1998b) recom-
mend setting up local groups of  in-service teachers to work on formative assessment 
at the school level along with neighboring local schools. These authors have done this 
with secondary math and science teachers and know that teachers can be very helpful 
to each other.
Teachers generally need to undertake or participate in some summative assessment 
as a basis for reporting grades. However, the task of  formative assessment for external 
purposes remains quite different from the task of  formative assessment to monitor 
and improve progress. While summative assessments provide a snapshot of  a stu-
dent’s performance on a given day under test conditions, formative assessment allows 
teachers to monitor and guide student’s performance over time in multiple prob-
lem-solving situations. Future research might examine how teachers deal with the 
relationship between their formative and summative roles, how teachers’ classroom 
assessments relate to external test results, and how external (summative) test results 
can be made more helpful in terms of  improving student performance.
References
P . Black and D. Wiliam, ‘ Assessment and Classroom Learning’, Assessment in Education, 
5 (1998a), 7–74. 
P . Black and D. Wiliam, ‘Inside the Black Box: Raising Standards Through Classroom 
Assessment’, Phi Delta Kappan, 80 (1998b), 139–48.
