semester     4
School, Community, 
and Teacher
COURSE GUIDE
Associate Degree in Education/
B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary
2012

This product has been made possible by the support of  the American People through the United States Agency for
International Development (USAID). The contents of  this report are the sole responsibility of  the authors, and do 
not necessarily reflect the views of  USAID or the United States Government.
Technical Support: Education Development Center (EDC); Teachers College, Columbia University

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
ii
Foreword
Teacher education in Pakistan is leaping into the future. This updated Scheme of  Studies is the latest 
milestone in a journey that began in earnest in 2006 with the development of  a National Curriculum, 
which was later augmented by the 2008 National Professional Standards for Teachers in Pakistan and 
the 2010 Curriculum of  Education Scheme of  Studies. With these foundations in place, the Higher 
Education Commission (HEC) and the USAID Teacher Education Project engaged faculty across the 
nation to develop detailed syllabi and course guides for the four-year B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary and 
two-year Associate Degree in Education (ADE). 
The syllabi and course guides have been reviewed by the National Curriculum Review Committee 
(NCRC) and the syllabi are approved as the updated Scheme of  Studies for the ADE and B.Ed. (Hons) 
Elementary programmes. 
As an educator, I am especially inspired by the creativity and engagement of  this updated Scheme of  
Studies. It offers the potential for a seismic change in how we educate our teachers and ultimately our 
country’s youngsters. Colleges and universities that use programmes like these provide their students 
with the universally valuable tools of  critical thinking, hands-on learning, and collaborative study .
I am grateful to all who have contributed to this exciting process; in particular the faculty and staff  
from universities, colleges, and provincial institutions who gave freely of  their time and expertise for 
the purpose of  preparing teachers with the knowledge, skills, and dispositions required for nurturing 
students in elementary grades. Their contributions to improving the quality of  basic education in 
Pakistan are incalculable. I would also like to thank the distinguished NCRC members, who helped 
further enrich the curricula by their recommendations. The generous support received from the 
United States Agency for International Development (USAID) enabled HEC to draw on technical 
assistance and subject-matter expertise of  the scholars at Education Development Center, Inc., and 
Teachers College, Columbia University . Together, this partnership has produced a vitally important 
resource for Pakistan. 
 
 
PROF . DR. SOHAIL NAQVI,
Executive Director,
Higher Education Commission,
Islamabad

HOW THIS COURSE GUIDE WAS DEVEL OPEDiii
How this course guide was developed
As part of nation-wide reforms to improve the quality of teacher education, the 
Higher Education Commission (HEC) with technical assistance from the USAID 
Teacher Education Project engaged faculty across the nation to develop detailed 
syllabi and course guides for the four-year B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary and two-year 
Associate Degree in Education (ADE). 
The process of designing the syllabi and course guides began with a curriculum 
design workshop (one workshop for each subject) with faculty from universities 
and colleges and ofﬁcials from provincial teacher education apex institutions. 
With guidance from national and international subject experts, they reviewed the 
HEC scheme of studies, organized course content across the semester, developed 
detailed unit descriptions and prepared the course syllabi. Although the course 
syllabi are designed primarily for Student Teachers, they are useful resource for 
teacher educators too. 
In addition, participants in the workshops developed elements of a course guide. 
The course guide is designed for faculty teaching the B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary 
and the ADE. It provides suggestions for how to teach the content of each course 
and identiﬁes potential resource materials. In designing both the syllabi and the 
course guides, faculty and subject experts were guided by the National Professional 
Standards for Teachers in Pakistan 2009 and the National Curriculum 2006. The 
subject experts for each course completed the initial drafts of syllabi and course 
guides. Faculty and Student Teachers started using drafts of syllabi and course 
guides and they provided their feedback and suggestions for improvement. 
Final drafts were reviewed and approved by the National Curriculum Review 
Committee (NCRC).
The following faculty were involved in designing this course guide:  Muhammad 
Tahir Khasi, GCEE Quetta; Sarfraz Ahmad, GCET Faisalabad; Saira Soomro, 
University of  Sindh; Zarina Rashid, Sardar Bahadur Khan Women University , 
Quetta; Abdul Khaliq, PITE Balochistan; Jalat Khan, GECE Quetta; Muhammad 
Ismail, GECE Hyderabad; Piaro Khan, GECE Hyderabad; Mahvish Naseem, Fatima 
Jinnah Women University , Rawalpindi; Bakhtiar Ahmed, RITE (M) Peshawar; 
Shafqat Ali, University of  Education, Lahore; Dr. Amir Hashmi, IER, Peshawar 
University; Dr. Asaf  Nawaz, Hazara University; Syed Takhliq u-Uzaman, GCET (M) 
College, Mirpur.
ivASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS)  ELEMENTARY
Subject expert guiding course design: Dr. Rashida Qureshi, Shaheed Zulfikar Ali 
Bhutto Institute of Science and Technology (SZABIST)
Date of NCRC review: 3 March 2012
NCRC Reviewers: Dr. Javed Iqbal, Karakoram International University, Gilgit; Dr. 
Abdul Hameed, University of Management and Technology, Lahore; Dr. 
Rafiqullah, Gomal University

T able of Contents
Syllabus  08
Introduction 18
Sample Assignments 21
Course Assessments 23
 
UNIT 1  Society, community, and education 26
 
UNIT 2  Understanding social interaction in schools 
 and communities  36
 
UNIT 3 School and culture 44
 
UNIT 4 Relationships between school and community 53
 
UNIT 5 Social institutions 59
 
UNIT 6 The teacher’s role in school and the community 65
 
UNIT 7 The working context of Pakistani teachers 71
 Methods and strategies 87
 Faculty resources 82

Syllabus 
SCHOOL, COMMUNITY, 
AND TEACHER
COURSE SYLLABUS:  School, Community, and T eacher
09
SCHOOL, COMMUNITY , AND TEACHER
Year/semester
Year 2, semester 4
Credit value
2 credits, 1 laboratory credit
Prerequisites
Successful completion of semesters 1–3
Course description
The purpose of  this course is to provide Student Teachers with a strong foundation for 
understanding the relationship between and among teachers, the school, and the fam-
ilies and community that support the school. Basic conceptualizations of  educational 
institutions and the role of  the teacher in relating to these institutions will be considered. 
Student Teachers will also explore how cultural, social, and historical forces have shaped 
their understanding of  the relationship teachers have with schools, communities, and 
families in Pakistan. The course will explore the social context of  schooling and examine 
how the work of  teachers is nested within school and community . It will provide orien-
tation to the process of  socialization in schools and how social factors affect education. 
Student Teachers will have opportunity to put this knowledge into practice in the 
accompanying one-credit laboratory by studying a school and its community , so that 
as teachers, they can mobilize support for educational programmes and contribute 
positively to their communities. Practical application of  the course will be emphasized 
as Student Teachers explore teaching and learning within both the school and the 
community . They will identify strategies, practices, and relationships that have proven 
fruitful within familiar contexts, and learn how to identify and respond to challenges 
in school, community , and teacher relationships. Student Teachers will identify how 
culture, gender, special needs, equity and equality , and collaborative working condi-
tions affect the school and community .
Course outcomes
Student Teachers will be able to:
• analyse and describe relationships between teachers, the school, and the   
 families and community that support the school
• identify how the teacher’s role is influenced by social and cultural factors that  
 affect education in schools and their communities
• recognize and value diverse cultural, traditional, and religious values and their  
 students’ learning needs in school and in the community
• list the social factors affecting education and how they can support the   
 development of  education nationally and, in particular, locally
• explain their role as role models for students and the community in general.

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
10
Learning and teaching approaches
Teaching and learning in this course are based on the principles of  reflective practice, 
participatory process, and critical analysis. Short introductory presentations will be 
made by the instructor and/or invited guests, but much of  the class time will be spent 
in discussion and group activities, including role play and presentations, aimed at 
consolidating understanding and exploring issues in more depth.
Student Teachers will be provided a course reading pack and will be directed to 
certain readings including online materials. As ready-made material on topics relevant 
to the course context (e.g. Pakistani schools and communities) may not be presently 
available, Student Teachers will also be expected to generate their own readings to 
share with others. As all Student Teachers will come to this course having attended 
secondary school, they will be expected to reflect on their own experiences, especially 
their roles and relationships as students. Against this familiar backdrop of  student life, 
Student Teachers will be expected to explore their unfamiliar role as a teacher in both 
social and professional contexts. 

COURSE SYLLABUS:  School, Community, and T eacher
11
Semester outline
UNIT 1: Society , community , and education
Week # T opics/themes
1
Introduction and overview of  the course 
Introduction to society , community , and education
Structures and functions of  community and schools in Pakistan
2
Impact of  education on society 
Role of  education in strengthening Pakistani communities
Review of  Unit 1
One of  the basic purposes of  the course is to understand the nested relationships 
between school and community and how to capitalize on these relationships to 
enhance student achievement. Student Teachers need to be introduced to the basic 
building blocks of  these institutions in order to understand the nature of  interaction 
between and among these institutions. 
These general topics will be grounded in the personal experiences of  the Student 
Teachers, who will be asked to draw on examples from their own communities. 
This will help in identifying social factors affecting education and the contextual 
role of  schools in supporting the development of  education nationally and, in 
particular, locally .
1

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
12
UNIT 2: Understanding social interaction in schools and communities
Week # T opics/themes
3
Meaning of  social interaction and socialization
Levels of  social interaction
Elements of  social interaction 
• Social contacts
• Communication
• Social attitudes and values
4
Types of  social interaction 
• Cooperation
• Competition
• Conflict
• Accommodation
• Assimilation
Meaning and types of  social groups 
Individual and group behaviour
5
The roles of  schools and teachers in developing social interaction for peace, 
harmony , and tolerance in Pakistani communities
Review of  Unit 2
It is important for the Student Teachers to understand group dynamics to be able 
to appreciate the nature of  the nested relationships between school and community 
for enhancing student achievement. This theme will expose Student Teachers to the 
theoretical bases and practical importance of  communication and interaction between 
and among stakeholders. 
Student Teachers and the Instructor will be invited to bring in local or regional 
examples of  working harmoniously with different stakeholders in a diverse cultural, 
traditional, and religious landscape. The unit will highlight the importance of 
teachers being able to assess the learning needs of  their students in school as well as 
in their community .
2

COURSE SYLLABUS:  School, Community, and T eacher
13
UNIT 3: School and culture
Week # T opics/themes
6
Main characteristics of  culture
Elementary concepts of  culture
• Cultural trait 
• Cultural complex 
• Cultural pattern 
• Cultural lag
• Cultural diversity
7
Culture and cultural elements of  Pakistani communities
Role of  education and school in the protection and transmission of  culture
8
Impact of  media on school and culture
Impact of  technology on school and culture
Review of  Unit 3
This theme is meant to expose Student Teachers to the concepts of  culture within a 
school and outside school (i.e. in the community) and the interaction of  these two 
cultures as they impact the relationships between and among stakeholders. Student 
Teachers will be able to identify how the teacher’s role is influenced by social and 
cultural factors that affect education in schools and their communities. 
Opportunities will be provided to revisit earlier concepts (from Units 1 and 2) to 
reconsider, for instance, the structures of  schools and communities in places where 
patterns of  social interactions can create competitive or cooperative climates in 
schools for marginalized groups. Similarly , gender issues and the culture of  inclusion/
exclusion, will also be considered in the context of  school and community structures 
and the role of  schools in creating cultural change. The prospective teacher’s role as a 
role model for students will be highlighted.
3

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
14
UNIT 4: Relationships between school and community
Week # T opics/themes
9
A school as a social, cultural, and community institution
• Effects of  a school on communities 
• Effects of  communities on a school
10
School as a hub for community services
A critical analysis of  the effective role of  schools and teachers in  
Pakistani communities
Review of  Unit 4
This theme is important for re-conceptualizing the role of  schools in relation to the 
community . Student Teachers need to understand a school’s identity as a social insti-
tution that makes it more than just a place for learning the three Rs – reading, writing, 
and arithmetic. 
Discussion will be grounded in Student Teachers’ own experiences in school and their 
observations of  communities. They can contribute case studies as discussion material 
for this unit. 
UNIT 5: Social institutions
Week # T opics/themes
11
Definition and types of  social institutions 
The family
Educational institutions 
Religious institutions 
12
Critical analysis of  the role of  social institutions in Pakistani schools
Review of  Unit 5
This unit is important for grounding the theoretical and practical aspects of  social 
institutions into local realities which students are familiar with. Students will be 
exposed to the interrelated and interdependent nature of  the beliefs and practices that 
tie schools, families and religious institutions. 
Discussion will be grounded in Student Teachers’ own experiences of  their daily lives. 
This unit may be covered in a week and a half. 
4
5

COURSE SYLLABUS:  School, Community, and T eacher
15
UNIT 6: The teacher’s role in school and the community
Week # T opics/themes
13
Teacher as an integral part of  the community
Teacher as a change agent in:
• Community
• School
14
Teachers as role models through their participation in community activities
Effects of  teachers and schools on individual and group behaviour
Review of  Unit 6
This is the most important unit of  the course. Student Teachers will identify 
prerequisites for promoting collaborative working conditions in order to promote 
a culture of  inclusion in schools and in the community . Through conceptualizing 
their own role as a change agent, Student Teachers will be able to recognize and 
identify how culture, gender, special needs, and equity and equality issues affect the 
school and community . 
Student Teachers will be invited to consider future aspirations while grounding their 
discussion in their own school experiences, especially their recollections of  ‘good’ 
teachers or their role models. 
UNIT 7: The working context of  Pakistani teachers
Week # T opics/themes
15
Teacher as a social activist 
Teacher’s leadership roles within and outside schools
16
Teacher’s role in establishing linkages among stakeholders
Review of  Unit 7
The focus of  this unit will be on the non-traditional roles Pakistani teachers play 
within their school and community . 
During this unit, it is important for the Instructor to distinguish between teachers’ 
traditional roles within the classroom from non-traditional roles outside the class-
room, such as the teacher as a community mobilizer, as a social activist, or in a 
formal and informal leadership role. 
6
7

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
16
UNIT 8: Practical experience
The concluding unit will be a practical task in the community or another field experience as assigned 
by the Instructor.
8
Suggested textbooks and references 
There is no standard textbook for this course. The books listed below should be treat-
ed as suggested readings that can provide support material for both Student Teachers 
and the Instructor. Chapters will be assigned when deemed appropriate. 
A. Bashiruddin and J. Retallick (eds.), Becoming Teacher Educators (Karachi: Aga Khan 
University-Institute of  Educational Development, 2009).
S. Hafeez, The Changing Pakistan Society (Karachi: Royal Book Company , 1991).
S. B. Kotley , The Basics of  Sociology (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2008).
L. Marshall and F . Rowland, A Guide to Learning Independently (4th edn.) (French Forest, 
NSW: Pearson Longman, 2006).
M. J. Abdalla and R. Qureshi, ‘Teacher Leadership for School-Based Professional 
Development: A Case Study’, in R. Qureshi and F . Shamim (eds.), Schools and Schooling 
Practices in Pakistan: Lessons for Policy and Practice (Karachi: Oxford University Press, 
2009). 
R. Qureshi, P . Pirzado, and S. Nasim, ‘Schooling in Rural Sindh, Pakistan’, in R. 
Qureshi and J. Rarieya (eds.), Gender and Education in Pakistan (Karachi: Oxford 
University Press, 2007).
R. Qureshi, ‘Education for Inclusion: What Would It Take to Have an Inclusive 
Primary School in Pakistan?’, Educational Awakening, 3: 20–31
R. Qureshi, ‘Colonial Legacy: Understanding the Historical Roots of  Female Illiteracy 
in Pakistan’, Muslim Education Quarterly, 23 (2006), 20–37.
R. Qureshi, ‘Is Child-Friendly School on the Agenda for School Reforms? 
Conversations with Pakistani School Heads’, Paper presented and published in the 
Conference Proceedings of  the International Conference on the Teacher Education: 
Transformative Society & Teacher Education Reform, 19–20 Sept 2008, Changchun, 
China, 1–10.

COURSE SYLLABUS:  School, Community, and T eacher
17
R. Qureshi and J. Rarieya (eds.), Gender and Education in Pakistan (Karachi: Oxford 
University Press, 2007) 
R. Qureshi and F . Shamim (eds.), Schools and Schooling Practices in Pakistan: Lessons for 
Policy and Practice (Karachi, Oxford University Press, 2008).
M. Shaaban and R. Qureshi, ‘Teacher Leaders: Experiences of  Pakistani Teachers in 
Leading School Improvement Activities’, Conference Proceedings of  the International 
Conference on ‘Quality in Education: Teaching and Leadership in Challenging 
Times‘, 21–23 Feb 2006, Pakistan: Aga Khan University-Institute for Educational 
Development, 558–64. 
Course assignments 
Details of  assignments will be listed on a separate handout to be provided by the 
Instructor at the beginning of  the course. These assignments are designed to help 
Student Teachers achieve the course outcomes. 
Grading policy 
Grading for this course follows the university’s policies. This will be explained by the 
Instructor early in the course and will include both coursework and examinations. It is 
recommended that at least 50% of  the course grade be determined by course work.

Introduction 
INTRODUCTION TO THE
COURSE GUIDE

19
Introduction
The course syllabus covers 16 weeks of  instruction. Each week Student Teachers are 
expected to attend two one-hour sessions and engage in laboratory work for at least 
one hour per week. This document provides Instructors with the introductory unit 
for the course and planning resources for course development. In Unit 1, two lesson 
options are given for each session. These offer different ways to teach each session and 
are intended as a guide for planning and teaching. 
Units 2–7 are not as fully developed, but ideas for planning and two options for each 
session are given. In addition, many resources for faculty and Student Teachers are 
provided in the Faculty Resources that accompanies this course guide.
This course guide is organized to provide examples of  how the course content be 
employed, but it is not meant to suggest that there is one best way to plan and teach. 
Some Instructors will prefer to create their own plans and will use the guide as an 
additional resource. Regardless of  the resources used, we encourage all faculty to 
teach in a manner that promotes active learning. For those who have not used active 
learning strategies, begin by experimenting with one or two ideas. Try a small change, 
such as asking Student Teachers to read something in advance and then have them 
discuss in small groups at the beginning of  a session. See how it works.
If  your experiment does not work, think about why and alter it. Faculty who take 
this approach seem to find that it does work for them and creates opportunities for 
further experimentation. 
Misconceptions 
Student Teachers are likely to enter their programme with their own ideas about the 
relationships between school, community , and teachers. They are also likely to have 
misconceptions such as the following:
• The teacher is solely responsible for a child’s education.
• Parents should not interfere in what happens at school.
• The school knows best and parents should do what the school tells them.
You should be aware of  and be ready to explore these misconceptions with your 
Student Teachers. There may be others depending on whom you are teaching.
Essential knowledge
Community is a term that is widely associated with ethnicity and religion. You will 
need to think about community in relation to the school in its broader sociological 
context. Look up dictionary definitions of  community before you start teaching this 
course. Here are three definitions from: 
 Ø http://dictionary .reference.com/browse/community: 
INTRODUCTION : School, Community, and T eacher

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
20
• a social group of  any size whose members reside in a specific locality , share   
 government, and often have a common cultural and historical heritage
• a social, religious, occupational, or other group sharing common characteristics  
 or interests and perceived or perceiving itself  as distinct in some respect from   
 the larger society within which it exists (usually preceded by the): the business   
 community; the community of  scholars
• a group of  men or women leading a common life according to a rule (usually a  
 religious community). 
These definitions reflect the different ways in which the word community can be used 
to refer to different groups of  people who may or may not be tied to a particular 
locale. However, the term is often understood to mean that a group of  people have 
been able to ‘accept and transcend their differences regardless of  the diversity of  their 
backgrounds (social, spiritual, educational, ethnic, economic, political, etc.). This 
enables them to communicate effectively and openly and to work together toward 
goals identified as being for their common good’. (Seven Community Definitions, 
 Ø http://www .community4me.com/comm_definitions.html).
Another helpful website is The Encyclopaedia of  Information Education, which 
contains material on the definition of  community and theories of  community .
 Ø http://www .infed.org/community/community .htm
The concept of  culture is central to the course, as well. Culture includes the beliefs, 
behaviours, artefacts, and characteristics that are shared by members of  a group, 
society , or community . People define themselves through culture. The institutions of  
a culture, such as family or educational and religious organizations, share common 
values, beliefs, language, and rules and commitments. 
Society refers to the people who share a common culture and live together in a 
community . The society may be based on a particular geographic location. We may 
speak of  large and diverse units of  society , such as Asian or Western society , organized 
by certain overarching similarities, principles, or beliefs, or of  a smaller region, such 
as Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, where customs, organizations, and laws are more homog-
enously shared. We can also think about society as a group of  people that reaches 
across communities to create their own organizations, customs, and laws, as in a 
professional or philanthropic organization.
Schools are social organizations established to instil the values of  a community , 
society , or nation through planned educational experiences. Education may be defined 
broadly as the accumulation of  knowledge, experience, and wisdom. It may also be 
defined narrowly as the act of  acquiring particular training, for example, going to 
school to learn a particular skill. 
Each of  these concepts – community , society , and education – is essential to the 
course. One of  the challenges in teaching the course will be to help Student Teachers 
re-examine these concepts so they can begin to see them in new ways and from 
different perspectives. 

21
Sample assignments
Assignments are suggested in each of  the session plans. Instructors should use their 
own judgement in using these or choosing others. In general, short-term assignments 
will include activities such as reading an article, preparing something for class, or 
bringing in materials. Longer-term assignments should allow Student Teachers to 
integrate and apply their learning and could be assigned in class and completed during 
laboratory sessions. 
Some examples are below .
Individual reflective journal from field observations 
All course participants will be expected to engage in field work. Student Teachers 
will keep field notes during observations in schools and the community , and they will 
write a one-page reflection per week that focuses on assigned topics. Journal topics 
should encourage Student Teachers to connect course content with the school and 
community . Specific data collection and observation techniques will be explained by 
the Instructor. 
Engagement with school, community, and/or families
This series of  activities would be appropriate for laboratory assignments and can be 
adapted to focus on:
• the individual school as a way of  understanding the inner life and culture of   
 the school 
• the community surrounding the school 
• the families who comprise the community
Understanding
Have Student Teachers develop an interview protocol for conducting interviews. 
Their purpose is to find out whom the people are who make up the schools (teachers, 
administration, staff, and students), communities (community members, shopkeep-
ers, and religious leaders), and families (parents, extended family , and siblings), their 
perspective on how the school (or community) works, and how they perceive relation-
ships among groups and the like.
Questions should invite conversation without being intrusive.
Communicating with families
Have Student Teachers find out how teachers communicate with parents. Ask parents 
how they prefer to communicate with teachers and school staff.
Student Teachers should observe parent–teacher conferences in the school where they 
teach as part of  their laboratory work. 
In examining what they have observed, Student Teachers could role-play handling 
difficult interactions with parents.
INTRODUCTION : School, Community, and T eacher

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
22
School and study assignment
The purpose of  this assignment is to understand the school and its community as 
social organizations and the teachers’ role in relation to these organizations. 
Student Teachers will be required to work in groups of  four or five to conduct a study 
of  a school and its surrounding community and prepare a report. Hours spent in 
schools will be considered laboratory hours. 
To guide their study , each group will prepare a set of  questions for school and com-
munity members. To help generate these questions, each group should think about 
what they want to know and who can answer their questions. For example, Student 
Teachers might ask school teachers about how often they meet parents and other 
community members and for what purpose; they might ask community members 
how often they visit the school or how they are involved in education.
While the questions will vary from group to group, each group should find out about 
both the school and community and the people who are integral to their functioning.
With regard to the school, Student Teachers should learn about formal and informal 
groups of  adults who work at the school (e.g. administration, teachers, volunteers, 
custodial staff ), governance, formal and informal power structures, and the school’s 
relationship with the community .
In examining the community , Student Teachers should learn more about its organiza-
tion, community members’ opinions and attitudes about the school, and the opinions 
of  business owners, shopkeepers, and community leaders regarding the (actual and 
ideal) relationships between school and community . 
Once the study has been completed and graded, Student Teachers should arrange a 
time to meet with the teacher and a separate time to meet with parents or caregivers 
to discuss what they have learnt. Student Teachers should be prepared to discuss this 
with the class.
The study should include the following headings:
• Introduction
• Setting (i.e. a description of  the settings where observation and interaction occurred)
• Members’ contributions to the study team (i.e. how responsibilities were   
 divided among the team)
• Summary of  observations in each context: school, community , and family (one  
 or two paragraphs in length)
• Report (five to seven page on was learnt from the study) 
• Raw data (i.e. field notes, notes from interviews, questionnaires, observational  
 notes, etc. in the appendix).

23
Course assessment
Multiple forms of  assessment will be used in the course. Many of  these may be new 
to Student Teachers. By using multiple forms of  assessment, the Instructor will be 
able to gain many insights on the knowledge, skills, and dispositions of  Student 
Teachers. In general, you will find suggestions for assessment included with each unit.
Plan for regular formative assessments (assessments for learning) and summative 
assessments (assessments of  learning). 
Student Teachers should know at the start of  the course which assignments or tasks 
will be part of  summative assessment and how they will be assessed. 
You should be clear in advance about how you will assess assignments. Sometimes 
a rubric helps – and it makes the process more transparent and useful for Student 
Teachers if  you share the rubric.
Assessment methods may include the following:
• Short quizzes
• Minute papers: Ask Student Teachers to take one minute to write about what  
 they are learning in class.
• Projects: Projects may be completed in class or as out-of-class assignments. These 
could include a school study , an essay , a presentation, a survey and report, or a 
report and reflection on a School Management Committee (SMC) meeting. 
• Observing and recording: Keep a log in a small notebook. Notice Student 
Teacher involvement in activities. Make note of  their engagement. From time 
to time you may wish to look at your notes and see who isn’t mentioned. 
Make a point to see who does not contribute to small groups, who dominates 
discussions, and the like. Write down questions you hear Student Teachers ask, 
facial expressions, body positions and gestures. Consider what your notes tell 
you about how they relate to the topic at hand. Your log should help you think 
about the class holistically and pinpoint issues that may need more attention 
or those that require additional support for a particular Student Teacher. Your 
notes also help you to judge whether you need to reframe the activity , clarify 
explanation, and the like. 
INTRODUCTION : School, Community, and T eacher

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
24
• Journaling: Have Student Teachers keep a course journal. After each session, 
have Student Teachers record reactions to the session, what they are learning 
about themselves, and what they are learning about teaching. This can be an 
effective tool for metacognitive development. For the journal to be effective 
as a learning tool, you need to look at it and provide occasional feedback. 
(Research on journaling suggests that when supervisors fail to comment on 
student dialogue journals, Student Teachers tend not to continue their jour-
nals.) You might check a few journals each day so that everyone gets feedback 
once over a two-week period.
 Another strategy is for Student Teachers to share their journals and make these 
the subject of  discussion about their own learning strategies and styles. This 
further helps develop their metacognitive skills and emphasis on collaborative 
community . You can also keep your own journal about yourself  as an Instructor 
and your reactions to sessions. Share it with other Student Teachers in an 
exchange. 
• Reading log: Readings will be drawn from a variety of  sources. Student 
Teachers are expected to develop a list of  assigned readings, with notes about 
the reading. Annotations should be about a paragraph in length.

 UNIT     1  SOCIETY, COMMUNITY, 
 AND EDUCATION
COURSE GUIDE: School, Community , and Teacher
27
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Unit overview
In this opening unit, Student Teachers will be introduced to the building blocks of  
schools and the communities around schools. They will examine how the relationship 
between school and community influences education. Student Teachers will reflect on 
the implications of  the relationship with reference to the role of  a teacher.
UNIT 1:  Society , community , and education
Week # T opics/themes
1
Introduction and overview of  the course 
Introduction to society , community , and education
Structures and functions of  community and schools in Pakistan
2
Impact of  education on society 
Role of  education in strengthening Pakistani communities
Review of  Unit 1
Learning goals
 l understand the integrated nature of  society , community , and schools
 l identify social factors that influence teaching and learning in Pakistan
 l recognize the contextual role of  schools in supporting the development of    
 education nationally and locally .
Essential questions
• How do communities and schools interact to influence education?
• How do teachers influence opinion makers in the community? 
• How can the community be involved in promoting development of  all learners?

28
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Assessments
• Class discussions
• Class assignments 
• One-page reflection on reading 
¡¡ Recall experiences from school and address following questions:
 - How similar/different was the relationship between community   
 and school in your personal experiences relative to those discussed  
 by Carrington?
 - How was the community involved in classroom activities?
 - How was the community involved in school activities?
Resources
G. M. Arif, ‘Production of  Cognitive Life Skills in Public, Private, and NGO Schools in 
Pakistan’, Pakistan Development Review (2003).
M. G. Behlol and M. Anwar, ‘Comparative Analyses of  the Teaching Methods and 
Evaluation Practices in English Subject at Secondary School Certificate (SSC) and 
General Certificate of  Education (GCE O-Level) in Pakistan’, International Education 
Studies, 4 (2001), 202–11.
M. Goos, ‘Home, School and Community Partnerships to Support Children’s 
Numeracy’, The Montana Mathematics Enthusiast, Monograph 1, (Missoula, MT: The 
Montana Council of  Teachers of  Mathematics, 2007). Available at: 
 Ø http://www .math.umt.edu/tmme/monograph1/Goos_FINAL_pp7_24.pdf
I. Farah, ‘Public–Private Partnerships: Implications for Primary Schooling in Pakistan’, 
Social Policy & Administration, 41 (2007), 339–54. 
S. B. Khan, ‘Problems in Universalization of  Primary Education in Pakistan’, Pakistan 
Journal of  Commerce and Social Sciences, 4 (2010), 147–55.
A. Q. Mohsin, M. Aslam, and F . Bashir, ‘Causes of  School Dropouts at the Secondary 
Level in the Barani Areas of  the Punjab (A Case Study of  Rawalpindi District)’, Journal 
of  Applied Sciences, 4 (2004), 155–8. 
P . W . Musgrave, ‘The Relationship Between School and Community: A 
Reconsideration’, Community Development Journal, 8 (1973), 167–78 doi: 10.1093/
cdj/8.3.167
A. Nasreen, A. Naz, and R. N. Awan, ‘Current Situation of  Teaching and Learning 
in the Subject of  Social Studies (Pakistan Studies) at Secondary School Level’, Asian 
Social Science, 7 (2011), 113–9.

COURSE GUIDE: School, Community , and Teacher
29
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Online resources
These following articles may be found online:
 
‘Reading’
 Ø http://www .deakin.edu.au/current-students/study-support/study-skills/hand-
outs/reading.php
‘ Assignment Writing’
 Ø http://www .deakin.edu.au/current-students/study-support/study-skills/hand-
outs/assignment-writing.php
‘Critical Analysis’
 Ø http://www .deakin.edu.au/current-students/study-support/study-skills/hand-
outs/critical-analysis.php
‘How to Write a Critical Analysis Paper’
 Ø http://www .mismr.org/services/biofocus/BF-v1i17/BioFocus_v1i17.pdf  
In Faculty Resources 
Student Teacher Readings
Causes of  Deteriorating Standard of  Education in Balochistan: A Review of 
Jabeen and Malik (2003) 
Problems in Universalization of  Primary Education in Pakistan: A Review of 
Khan (2010) 
Faculty Resources
Home and School Relationships, Carrington (2008) 
Problems in Universalization of  Primary Education in Pakistan: A Review of 
Khan (2010)
Week 1, session 1: Introduction to the course and  
key concepts
Option 1
Introduction (5 minutes) 
Explain that the first two weeks of  class will focus on the relationship between schools 
and the community in terms of  increasing children’s learning achievement. Invite 
Student Teachers’ thoughts on this topic.
Group discussion (20 minutes) 
Write society, community, and education on the board. 

30
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Divide Student Teachers in three groups. Assign one of  the three terms or concepts to 
each group. Invite each group to discuss their understanding and develop a reasonable 
definition of  the term. Ask them also to think about how the term is connected to the 
other two terms.
Ask each group to report briefly on their discussion and definition. 
Lecture (30 minutes) 
Review the major definitions of  the three concepts, including relevant points from 
the Student Teachers’ definitions and relating them to Pakistan. Emphasize the 
following points:
• notions of  community and society in Pakistan 
• differences between school and schooling
• differences in schooling patterns of  communities living in same region.
Option 2
Group brainstorm (15 minutes) 
Student Teachers work in small groups to create definitions of  society , community , 
and education. Each group should focus on one term. They will then share their 
definitions with the class or write them on the board. 
 
Whole-class discussion and synthesis (15 minutes; 25 minutes) 
The class will point out similarities and differences between the definitions and exam-
ine why these differences exist.
Synthesize the discussion through an interactive presentation of  major definitions of  the 
three concepts and their relevance in understanding the state of  education in Pakistan. 
 
Summary (5 minutes) 
Have Student Teachers share insights they had or questions that arose during the 
session. Address as many as time permits.
Assignment
This assignment applies to both options. Have Student Teachers read the following:
S. B. Carrington, Home, School and Community Relationships’, in A. Ashman and 
J. Elkins (eds.), Education for Inclusive and Diversity (Frenchs Forest, NSW: Pearson 
Education Australia, 2008). 
Have Student Teachers write a one page reflection on the reading in which they 
discuss their reaction. They should note what the article made them think about and 
their opinions of  the home–school relationship. 
Depending on Student Teachers’ English skills, you may want to select an excerpt 
from the chapter, as it is lengthy . Student Teachers who have difficulty reading English 
may get more benefit from a summary or a short passage.

COURSE GUIDE: School, Community , and Teacher
31
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Week 1, session 2: Structures and functions of community 
and schools in Pakistan 
Option 1
Reflection (15 minutes)
Invite Student Teachers to recall their own experiences in school and of  schooling, 
and ask Student Teachers to respond (in writing) to the following questions:
• How similar or different was the relationship between you school and community  
 compared to those discussed by Carrington?
• How was the community involved in classroom activities at your school?
• How was the community involved in school activities at your school?
Ask Student Teachers to include any other relevant details in their reflection piece.
Pair-share (15 minutes)
Have Student Teachers exchange papers so that they can read what their peers wrote.
In pairs, ask them to discuss the positive and negative ways that communities can 
affect education. 
Active lecture (30 minutes) 
Select some general examples from the reading by Jabeen and Malik, ‘Causes of  
Deteriorating Standard of  Education in Balochistan’, and highlight the role that soci-
ety and community play in hindering/ promoting education in Pakistan. (A review of  
the article, ‘Causes of  Deteriorating Standard of  Education in Balochistan: A Review 
of  Jabeen and Malik’ is available in Faculty Resources.)
Give Student Teachers two minutes after discussing each example and ask if  they can 
identify similar examples in their own context. Accept as many examples as time permits.
At the end of  the lecture ask Student Teachers to write down the additional examples 
(identified by peers during lecture) as case examples. 
Option 2 (instead of the active lecture in Option 1)
Whole-class discussion (30 minutes) 
Assign the reading by Jabeen and Malik, ‘Causes of  Deteriorating Standard of  
Education in Balochistan’ (or the review of  the article, ‘Causes of  Deteriorating 
Standard of  Education in Balochistan: A Review of  Jabeen and Malik’ in Faculty 
Resources) as a pre-class reading. Give Student Teachers guiding questions: Can the 
causes of  deteriorating standard of  Education in Balochistan be generalized to whole 
of  Pakistan? Yes or no? Why or why not?

32
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
The purpose is to bring out contextual factors that create differences in the standard 
of  teaching and learning in different contexts. (The executive summary of  another 
pertinent study Quality of  Primary Education in Pakistan is in Faculty Resources. You may 
wish to assign this if  your Student Teachers do not have access to Internet.)
Week 2, session 3: Impact of education on society 
Option 1
Prepare a handout on problems identified by Khan (2010) (see ‘Problems in 
Universalization of  Primary Education in Pakistan: A Review of  Khan (2010)’) in 
Faculty Resources for this course.
In small groups, have Student Teachers identify incidences of  similar problems in their 
school life. Guide the discussion around issues such as poverty , conflict, and inequality 
in communities where education is lacking.
Option 2
Group discussion and report (40 minutes) 
Introduce the topic for the lesson and check that Student Teachers understand the 
term school dropout. In small groups, have Student Teachers discuss school dropouts. 
Share the following questions with them to guide their discussion:
• Why do children drop out of  school?
• Which children drop out of  school? Are some children more likely to drop out  
 than others?
• Who is responsible for them dropping out of  school?
• Who is responsible for the education of  children who have dropped out of  school? 
Ask each group to report back on their discussion. Ask one the Student Teachers to 
record main points on the board or on a flip chart.
Whole-class discussion (15 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers why we should be concerned about the problem of  school 
dropouts. Lead the discussion by probing and hinting. 
Explain that some educators have stopped saying that children drop out of  school. 
Instead, they say that say that children are pushed out of  school. Ask Student Teachers 
what they think about this: which term do they think is most appropriate and why? 
Wrap up the discussion with a departing thought on social capital. (Social capital refers 
to the idea that social networks have value. Networks can be educational, social, and 
cultural. People who know the interests, preferences, manners, and language of  a 
dominant group will have more social capital.)

COURSE GUIDE: School, Community , and Teacher
33
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Summary (5 minutes) 
Have Student Teachers share insights or questions they have had during the session. 
You may want to share the handout ‘Problems in Universalization of  Primary 
Education’ (from Faculty Resources). Ask Student Teachers to complete the handout 
and compare the information with the list given by Jabeen and Malik.
Week 2, session 4: Role of education in strengthening 
Pakistani communities
Option 1
Think, pair, share (15 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to think of  some of  the challenges in their community , and 
invite them to share these with the person sitting next to them.
Discussion (15 minutes) 
Invite Student Teachers to share some of  the challenges identified during think, pair, 
share with the whole class. Accept as many case examples as time permits.
Have the class compare the lists offered by Jabeen and Malik with the one offered 
by Khan. How many of  the class’s case examples were about one of  the challenges 
suggested in the two resources?
Option 2
Review of article (30 minutes)
Prepare a handout on the article by Mohsin et al., ‘Causes of  School Dropouts at 
the Secondary Level in the Barani Areas of  the Punjab (A Case Study of  Rawalpindi 
District)’. (Also see the review of  Khan and the handout ‘Problems in Universalization 
of  Primary Education’ in Faculty Resources).
Share the article in the handout with the Student Teachers. Ask them to write a 
summary of  what causes students to drop out according to the article and to identify 
the role of  community in mitigating these causes. 
Group discussion (15 minutes)
In a group discussion, notice the similarities and differences in causes and solutions, 
and point these out in an interactive presentation on how education can improve the 
quality of  relationships within and among Pakistani communities.

34
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Note on the research laboratory
Whichever option you select for this session, introduce the idea of  the research labora-
tory and the practical aspect of  this course. Remind Student Teachers that one credit of  
the class is a laboratory credit, which involves a research study to be conducted on some 
aspect of  a school or a community around it. 
Some ideas for the research project include the following;
• observing teaching and learning of  a specific subject (e.g. English or science), 
with   a focus on assessing effective uses of  different pedagogies
• assessing how parents are involved in a school’s day-to-day workings
• examining whether school culture is inclusive of  students with visible disabilities
• exploring if  a school is gender friendly .
Ask Student Teachers if  they have an interest in any particular issue or aspect of  school–
community relations. At this stage, the introduction is meant to make Student Teachers 
aware of  some of  the issues that will be worth researching.

 UNIT     2  UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL 
 INTERACTION IN SCHOOLS 
 AND COMMUNITIES
COURSE GUIDE: School, Community , and Teacher
37
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Unit overview
In this unit, Student Teachers will explore the concepts associated with group dynam-
ics in order to understand how everyday interaction is guided and facilitated by social 
structures such as community and social organizations. They will analyse the agents 
and objectives of  socialization as well as their role in cultural continuance. Student 
Teachers will also examine the theoretical bases and practical importance of  commu-
nication and interaction between and among stakeholders. 
UNIT 2: Understanding social interaction in schools  
and communities
Week # T opics/themes
3
Meaning of  social interaction and socialization
Levels of  social interaction
Elements of  social interaction 
• Social contacts
• Communication
• Social attitudes and values
4
Types of  social interaction 
• Cooperation
• Competition
• Conflict
• Accommodation
• Assimilation
Meaning and types of  social groups 
Individual and group behaviour
5
The roles of  schools and teachers in developing social interaction 
for peace, harmony , and tolerance in Pakistani communities
Review of  Unit 2

38
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Learning goals
 l understand the role of  socialization in continuance of  culture
 l recognize group formation and stages of  group formation
 l identify stakeholders that influence group dynamics in schools and the community
 l understand the importance of  communication and interaction between and   
 among stakeholders
 l recognize the contextual role of  schools in promoting social stability   
 nationally and locally .
Essential questions
• How does socialization help promote or resist social change?
• Are there local/regional examples of  different stakeholders working harmoniously  
 in a diverse cultural, traditional, and religious landscape? 
• What are the basic strategies of  effective communication?
• How can teachers assess students’ learning needs in school and in their community?
Assessments
• Class discussions 
• Class assignments 
Resources
M. A. Buzdar and A. Ali, ‘Parents’ Attitude toward Daughters’ Education in Tribal 
Area of  Dera Ghazi Khan, Pakistan’, Turkish Online Journal of  Qualitative Inquiry, 2 
(2011), 16–23. 
A. Q. Mohsin, M. Aslam, and F . Bashir, ‘Causes of  School Dropouts at the Secondary 
Level in the Barani Areas of  the Punjab (A Case Study of  Rawalpindi District)’, Journal 
of  Applied Sciences, 4 (2004), 155–8. 
S. Parveen, ‘Female Education at Secondary School Level in the Province of  Sindh, 
Pakistan’, Journal of  Educational Research, 9 (2006), 16–30.
R. G. Perrino, ‘The Socialization Process and Its Impact on Children and Learning’
 Ø <http://www .nvtutoring.com/pdfs/Socialization.pdf>, accessed 3 April 2013.
D. Foulger, ‘Models of  the Communication Process’, 25 February 2004) 
 Ø <http://davis.foulger.info/research/unifiedModelOfCommunication.htm>, 
accessed 3 April 2013.

COURSE GUIDE: School, Community , and Teacher
39
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
In Faculty Resources 
Student Teacher Readings
Socialization and Child Development
Social Interaction
Faculty Resources
Peace Education: Working Paper
Models of  Communication Process
Week 3, session 5: Meaning of social interaction and 
socialization
Option 1 
If  you have Internet access, select a video on the socialization process. For example, 
Education Portal has a video Sense of  Self  and Self-Socialization: The Development of  
Self-Views, which would be helpful for this lesson. The video is available at: 
 Ø http://education-portal.com/academy/lesson/sense-of-self-and-self-socialization-
the-development-of-self-views.html.
Discuss the following questions with Student Teachers:
• What does socialization mean? 
• How does socialization create differences in values and beliefs?
• Why should teachers be aware of  the differences in beliefs and practices of    
 students in their class?
Option 2
Pre-assign the article ‘The Socialization Process and Its Impact on Children and 
Learning’ (available from http://www .nvtutoring.com/pdfs/Socialization.pdf ), 
which discusses the socialization process. Alternatively , have Student Teachers read 
‘Socialization and Child Development’ in Faculty Resources.
In small groups, each Student Teacher should summarize the article and then 
exchange their summaries with others in the group. Student Teachers should check 
that their partners did not miss any significant points.
 
Ask each group to share the important points raised by the article. If  groups come up 
with points that were not included in the articles, ask why those points are important. 
Point out similarities that crop up in group responses as well, and ask why those 
commonalities might be significant.
As this is an interactive lecture, be sure to fill in any gaps so that Student Teachers 
remain engaged.

40
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 3, session 6
• Levels of  social interaction
• Elements of  social interaction 
¡¡ Social contacts
¡¡ Communication
¡¡ Social attitudes and values
Option 1
Divide Student Teachers into groups and have them read ‘Models of  the 
Communication Process’ by Davis Foulger as a jigsaw reading.
 Ø http://davis.foulger.info/research/unifiedModelOfCommunication.htm
Ask Student Teachers the following questions:
• How do these models apply to schools?
• What kind of  patterns do you expect to exist in communities? Why?
• What patterns of  communication and kinds of  interactions will be beneficial for  
 promoting education? 
Discuss communication and socialization with the whole class. You might want to 
draw on a resource such as Vygotsky’s Language and Thought to prepare a brief  presen-
tation on how language acts as a socializing force. ‘Which Comes First, Language or 
Thought? (Available from http://www .news.harvard.edu/gazette/2004/07.22/21-
think.html) and ‘Language and Thought Processes’ (from Faculty Resources) may also 
be helpful for this discussion.
Option 2
Make posters of  communication models and display these on a wall. (You may want to use 
the following article to prepare Models of  the Communication Process’ by Davis Foulger).
 Ø http://davis.foulger.info/research/unifiedModelOfCommunication.htm
Divide Student Teachers into small groups and have them choose a model to apply to 
an imaginary Parent–Teacher Association (PTA) or School Management Committee 
(SMC) meeting. They should use the model to analyse an imaginary meeting or to 
conduct a meeting.
Week 4, session 7: T ypes of social interaction 
Option 1
Read ‘ Assimilation Models, Old and New: Explaining a Long-Term Process’ by Susan 
K. Brown and Frank D. Bean from the University of  California, Irvine, which can be 
found on http://www .migrationinformation.org/USfocus/display .cfm?ID=442. A short 
summary of  the concept of  social interaction, suitable for student reading, is included in 
Faculty Resources. Discuss the implications of  assimilation and acculturation for margin-
alized communities and the teaching and learning of  excluded students.

COURSE GUIDE: School, Community , and Teacher
41
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Option 2
Show the class the video Cultural Diversity (available from 
 Ø http://www .youtube.com/watch?v=EsoCko2OAW A).
Ask Student Teachers to interpret the themes in the video. Have them consider 
whether cultural diversity is a school strength or weakness; they should explain the 
reasons for their answers.
Ask how these differences and diversity in communities affects teaching and 
learning in school.
Week 4, session 8: Social groups and individual and 
group behaviour
Option 1
Review the social groups chapter of  any standard textbook introduction to sociology 
such as chapter 5 of  Essentials of  Sociology (8th edn) by Brinkerhoff, Ortega, White, 
and Weitz (2011) or chapter 7 of  Introduction to Sociology by Cohen and Orbuch (1990). 
Use these chapters to explain the basic types of  social groups. 
Ask Student Teachers to identify different types of  groups, including those in schools 
and the community . Are there some groups that are more important for improving 
teaching and learning in schools? Student Teachers should explain their answers.
 
Guide the discussion towards the role of  primary groups such as family and friends 
and secondary groups such as co-workers in organizations such as schools. 
Option 2
Show the class the video Social Groups about different types of  groups. (available from 
 Ø http://www .youtube.com/watch?v=wS7VPPZKSDg&feature=related)
Use the video as a starting point, and guide the discussion towards various types of  
groups, highlighting the groups that play an important role in promoting education. 
Week 5, session 9: The roles of schools and teachers in 
developing social interaction for peace, harmony, and 
tolerance in Pakistani communities
Both options require the Internet. If  you do not have access, consider planning your 
session around ‘Peace Education: Working Paper’ (in Faculty Resources). You might 
prepare a presentation highlighting key concepts or select paragraphs to be used as a 
readers’ theatre with a follow-up discussion. (See ‘Methods and Strategies’ at the end 
of  this course guide to learn how to use readers’ theatre as a strategy .)

42
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Option 1
Show the class the video from the Interfaith League Against Poverty’s (I-LAP) 
Interfaith Peace Museum of  Pakistan in Islamabad (available from http://www .
youtube.com/watch?v=H-qbzgmjtxE ). Guide the discussion around the video 
by asking why it is important to accept and accommodate cultural diversity and 
religious tolerance. 
Option 2
Show the class the Education for Peace in Pakistan video from I-LAP (available from 
http://www .youtube.com/watch?v=khN-xZQ0Kw0&feature=related). The video 
can be used as a starting point for a discussion on the roles of  schools and teachers in 
promoting peace and tolerance. 
Week 5, session 10: Review of Unit 2
Option 1
Ask Student Teachers to make posters representing the main concepts discussed 
during the Unit 2 sessions. 
Option 2
If  you have asked Student Teachers to keep journals on this course, ask them to 
share their journal entries from session 5. Then, other Student Teachers can add their 
thoughts. The Instructor will repeat the same practice for other sessions until each 
session has been recapped. (Work within the time limits.)
Note on the research laboratory
During week five, follow up on Student Teacher’s research laboratory work. 
By this time Student Teachers should have selected a working title for their project. If  
they have not selected a topic yet, help them choose a community or school to study . 

 UNIT     3 SCHOOL AND CULTURE 
COURSE GUIDE: School, Community , and Teacher
45
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Unit overview
Student Teachers will analyse the concepts of  culture within school, outside school 
(i.e. in the community), and the interaction of  these two cultures as it impacts the 
relationships between and among stakeholders.  
UNIT 3: School and culture
Week # T opics/themes
6
Main characteristics of  culture
Elementary concepts of  culture
• Cultural trait 
• Cultural complex 
• Cultural pattern 
• Cultural lag
• Cultural diversity
7
Culture and cultural elements of  Pakistani communities
Role of  education and school in the protection and transmis-
sion of  culture
8
Impact of  media on school and culture
Impact of  technology on school and culture
Review of  Unit 3
Learning goals
 l identify social and cultural factors that affect education in schools and  
 their communities
 l recognize how the teacher’s role is influenced by cultural and social factors.
Essential questions
• How do cultural variations interact to influence education?
• How do teachers influence school and community culture? How are they   
 influenced by these cultures?
Assessments
• Class discussions 
• Class assignments 

46
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Resources
M. A. Buzdar and A. Ali, ‘Parents’ Attitude toward Daughters’ Education in Tribal 
Area of  Dera Ghazi Khan, Pakistan’, Turkish Online Journal of  Qualitative Inquiry, 2 
(2011), 16–23. 
I. Farah and S. Shera, ‘Female Education in Pakistan: A Review’, in R. Qureshi and J. 
Rarieya (eds.), Gender and Education in Pakistan (Karachi: Oxford University Press, 2007)
D. O’Neil, ‘Language and Thought Processes’ (2006) 
 Ø <http://anthro.palomar.edu/language/language_5.htm>, accessed on 4 March 2013.
S. A. M. Shah and S. Amjad, ‘Cultural Diversity in Pakistan: National vs Provincial’, 
Mediterranean Journal of  Social Sciences, 2 (2011), 331–44. 
‘School Context: Bridge or Barrier to Change?’, Southwest Educational Development 
Laboratory (1992) 
 Ø <http://www .sedl.org/change/school/culture.html>, accessed on 4 March 2013.
 
In Faculty Resources 
Student Teacher Readings
The Culture of  School and the Challenge of  Diversity
Is Media Changing Society and Culture in Pakistan?
Faculty Resources
Language and Thought Processes 
To prepare for this unit and the sessions below , review ‘Language and Thought 
Processes’ in Faculty Resources (also available at 
 Ø http://anthro.palomar.edu/language/language_5.htm). 
The article and related website may be helpful in providing background information 
as well as the basis for an active or mini-lecture. Most sessions will require an active 
lecture or sharply focused discussion around the suggested topic and activities. A 
reading on school culture and diversity , ‘The Culture of  School and the Challenge of  
Diversity’, is also in Faculty Resources.
Also, in advance of  Option 1 for Week 8, session 15: Impact of  media on school and 
culture, ask Student Teachers to keep a log of  things they notice about how the media 
(e.g. television, newspapers, radio, magazines) target children.

COURSE GUIDE: School, Community , and Teacher
47
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Week 6, session 11: Main characteristics of culture
Option 1
Assign as a pre-class reading a chapter on education in Sindh, such as R. Qureshi, P . 
Pirzado, and S. Nasim, ‘Schooling in Rural Sindh, Pakistan’, in R. Qureshi and J. Rarieya 
(eds.), Gender and Education in Pakistan (Karachi: Oxford University Press, 2007).
Provide Student Teachers with guiding questions, including the following:
• What are the main concepts discussed in the chapter?
• Can multiple cultures coexist?
• Do schools have their own cultures?
Engage Student Teachers in a whole-class discussion based on the reading. Lead 
the discussion towards how different cultural practices can create or perpetuate the 
culture of  inclusion/exclusion in schools and communities.
Option 2
For discussion, use the framework of  the chapter on education in Sindh by R. 
Qureshi, P . Pirzado, and S. Nasim, ‘Schooling in Rural Sindh, Pakistan’, in R. Qureshi 
and J. Rarieya (eds.), Gender and Education in Pakistan (Karachi:Pakistan: Oxford 
University Press, 2007). Ask Student Teachers to recall their school days and identify 
cultural practices similar or dissimilar to the ones described in the chapter. 
Ask Student Teachers to note which practices they are most likely to adopt and avoid 
when they become teachers. They should provide a rationale for each practice.
In an interactive lecture, build on these rationales and explain how they are products 
of  our culture.
Note for the next session
If  you plan to use Option 2 in the next session, divide Student Teachers into pairs to 
investigate and prepare a brief  presentation on the concepts listed below: 
• cultural trait
• cultural complex 
• cultural pattern 
• cultural lag
• cultural diversity .
You will need to assign the concepts so that all of  them are presented. Explain that you 
will select at least two pairs to present in the next session. The pairs should use examples 
relevant to Pakistan related to one of  the concepts on the list. 

48
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 6, session 12: Elementary concepts of culture
Option 1
Prepare a short, interactive lecture on the following concepts: 
• cultural trait 
• cultural complex 
• cultural pattern 
• cultural lag
• cultural diversity .
The lecture should include examples and allow for sufficient time for Student 
Teachers to share and discuss their own examples. 
Focus on cultural diversity . Ask Student Teachers to recall their own school experienc-
es. Pose the following questions:
• Was there diversity in the classroom? Why? Why not?
• Were students treated differently by teachers and school staff ? In what ways?
• Did some students participate more than others? Why?
• Did all students participate in the same way or did they participate in different  
 ways? In what ways was participation different?
• What did the teacher do to encourage quiet students’ engagement and participation? 
• Were boys and girls (in co-ed classes) treated differently by teachers and   
 school staff ? 
Have Student Teachers prepare a report about cultural diversity in their schools 
as an assignment. 
Option 2
Invite Student Teachers to share their presentations on cultural concepts.
If  time allows, you could also do the activity on cultural diversity .
Week 7, session 13: Culture and cultural elements of 
Pakistani communities
Option 1
Have Student Teachers write a brief  essay on how culture affects different people 
in Pakistan. 
Ask Student Teachers to share their answers. Point out similarities and differences 
in their observations on the role of  culture in Pakistan communities. Ask them to 
explain why their answers might vary .
Guide the discussion around values, beliefs, and practices.

COURSE GUIDE: School, Community , and Teacher
49
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Option 2
Ask Student Teachers to name one cultural trait, belief, or practice of  their own 
community . If  you Student Teachers are from different regions, discuss how regional 
practices differ. 
Week 7, session 14: Role of education and school in the 
protection and transmission of culture
Option 1
Ask Student Teachers to list local and public holidays and festivals. Help them to 
include events that celebrate local customs:
• Why are local holidays and festivals important? For whom are they important? 
• How are they celebrated? 
• Do schools acknowledge these holidays and festivals?
• How do schools participate in these events? 
• Do schools teach about and value these holidays and festivals?
• If  schools acknowledge and celebrate local holidays and festivals, what is the   
 impact on the transmission and protection of  culture? 
• If  schools do not acknowledge and celebrate local holidays and festivals, what is  
 the impact on the transmission and protection of  culture? 
Option 2
The article ‘Models of  the Communication Process’ in Faculty Resources may be 
helpful in preparing for this session.
Ask Student Teachers to collect pictures of  school uniforms for boys and girls. 
Then, divide Student Teachers into small groups and have them discuss the 
following questions:
• Is the local traditional style of  dress represented by these uniforms?
• Do any aspects of  these uniforms (e.g. material, design, colour) reflect   
 social distinctions? 
• Are there any other noticeable differences between the uniforms?
• What do the uniforms say about the school culture?

50
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 8, session 15: Impact of media on school and culture
Option 1
In advance of  Option 1, ask Student Teachers to keep a log of  things they notice about 
how the media (e.g. television, newspapers, radio, magazines) target children. 
Have Student Teachers share their log with a partner. Ask them to think about the 
following questions while they discuss their logs:
• What do the logs indicate about the ways children are targeted by the media?
• Do the media take an inclusive approach?
• Do the media promote cultural diversity?
• Do the media have a positive or negative impact on school and culture?
Discuss the questions as a class. You might want to prompt discussion with additional 
questions and statements, such as:
• The media present children from diverse backgrounds in a positive way .
• Media representations of  children use gender stereotypes.
Do Student Teachers agree?
Have Student Teachers imagine that they are part of  a media team selected by the 
provincial government to promote children’s rights to education. Ask them to prepare 
a brief  media plan addressing the following questions:
• What media would you use? Why? 
• What messages would you communicate? How?
• How will you make your plan inclusive?
This task could become a project for each group to complete. 
Option 2
In advance of  this option you will need to find at least two articles (maximum four 
articles depending on length) about an educational issue. Ideally , the articles will 
present slightly different opinions on the issue. Alternatively , you could find at least 
two articles that discuss several different issues.
This option uses the text-against-text method. (See ‘Methods and Strategies’ at the 
end of  this course guide for an explanation of  the method.)
 

COURSE GUIDE: School, Community , and Teacher
51
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Divide the class into small groups of  three. Distribute at least two articles on one issue 
to each group. Ask Student Teachers to look at each article separately and discuss the 
following questions: 
• What do you think the writer’s main point is? 
• How does the writer support his or her argument? 
• In what ways do the writers agree or disagree? 
• What is your opinion on the issue? 
Wrap up the session with reflections from Student Teachers on the activity . 
Assignment 
After each option, ask Student Teachers to read ‘Is Media Changing Society and 
Culture in Pakistan?’ from Faculty Resources.
Week 8, session 16: Impact of technology on school 
and culture
Option 1
The Instructor will need to bring a variety of  articles to class about the use of  technol-
ogy at home, at school, and in organizations. 
Divide Student Teachers into small groups of  three or four. Provide each group with 
a set of  articles to read. Ask them to note the pros and cons of  technology described 
in the articles. Move between groups and help them make sense of  the articles and to 
discuss their contents. 
In a whole-class discussion, ask Student Teachers whether they think technology 
produces homogeneous cultures. Have them explore the concept of  globalization and 
its impact on culture in the school and community .
Wrap up the discussion by making points about globalization that the Student 
Teachers may have missed.

52
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Option 2
Divide Student Teachers into four groups: two groups for technology in schools and 
two groups against technology in schools. 
Allow each group to develop their arguments through two parallel debates. (You 
may need to have one for and one against group work outside the classroom so that 
everyone can hear what is being said.) Have Student Teachers debate the topic, with 
one member from each group acting as the group’s spokesperson.
Wrap up the discussion by highlighting the role of  technology and globalization in 
changing culture in schools and communities in Pakistan.
Note on the research laboratory
By this time Student Teachers should have started going to the school/community they 
have selected. The Instructor needs respond to their questions related to research meth-
ods and issues that have occurred in the field. In every session, time should be allocated 
to address questions and discuss progress.

 UNIT     4 RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN 
 SCHOOL AND COMMUNITY

54
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit overview
In this unit Student Teachers will analyse the multidimensional identity of  schools as 
a social institution, meaning that schools are more than just a place for learning the 
three Rs – reading, writing, and arithmetic.
UNIT 4: Relationships between school and community
Week # T opics/themes
9
A school as a social, cultural, and community institution
• Effects of  a school on communities 
• Effects of  communities on a school
10
School as a hub for community services
A critical analysis of  the effective role of  schools and 
teachers in Pakistani communities
Review of  Unit 4
Learning goals 
 l understand the social identity of  a school
 l recognize the multidimensionality of  a school in relation to the community .
Essential questions
• How do communities perceive schools?
• What do families expect from teachers?
• How realistic are a community’s expectations of  schools and teachers?
Assessments
• Class discussions 
• Class assignments 
• Observation journal entries
¡¡ Each week Student Teachers will write a one-page reflection of  
 their observations.
¡¡ Some guiding questions for the weekly journal entry are listed in  
 each sub-topic. 
• Journal reflections; consider the following reflection questions:
¡¡ Is there diversity in the classroom? 
¡¡ How are different students treated differently? 
¡¡ Do different students participate differently?
¡¡ What does the teacher do to encourage girls’ engagement and participation? 

COURSE GUIDE: School, Community , and Teacher
55
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Resources
G. M. Arif, ‘Production of  Cognitive Life Skills in Public, Private, and NGO Schools in 
Pakistan’, Pakistan Development Review, 42 (2003), 1–28. Available at 
 Ø http://www .pide.org.pk/pdf/PDR/2003/Volume1/1-28.pdf.
M. A. Buzdar and A. Ali, ‘Parents’ Attitude toward Daughters’ Education in Tribal 
Area of  Dera Ghazi Khan, Pakistan’, Turkish Online Journal of  Qualitative Inquiry, 2 
(2011), 16–23. 
T . Jabeen and N. Malik, ‘Causes of  Deteriorating Standard of  Education in 
Balochistan’, Journal of  Applied Sciences, 3 (2003), 89–91. 
S. B. Khan, ‘Problems in Universalization of  Primary Education in Pakistan’, Pakistan 
Journal of  Commerce and Social Sciences, 4 (2010), 147–55.
A. Q. Mohsin, M. Aslam, and F . Bashir, ‘Causes of  School Dropouts at the Secondary 
Level in the Barani Areas of  the Punjab (A Case Study of  Rawalpindi District)’, Journal 
of  Applied Sciences, 4 (2004), 155–8. 
S. Parveen, ‘Female Education at Secondary School Level in the Province of  Sindh, 
Pakistan’, Journal of  Educational Research, 9 (2006), 16–30.
S. A. M. Shah and S. Amjad, ‘Cultural Diversity in Pakistan: National vs Provincial’, 
Mediterranean Journal of  Social Sciences, 2 (2011), 331–44 
L. Tett, ‘Parents and School Communities in Japan and Scotland: Contrasts in Policy 
and Practice in Primary Schools’, International Journal of  Lifelong Education, 23 (2004), 
259–73. 
A New Wave of  Evidence: The Impact of  School, Family , and Community 
Connections on Student Achievement (available from 
 Ø http://www .sedl.org/connections/resources/evidence.pdf).
The School as Community Hub: Beyond Education Iron Cage’ (available from 
 Ø http://www .policyalternatives.ca/sites/default/files/uploads/publications/our-
selves/docs/OSOS_Summer10_Preview .pdf)
An Integrated Approach Through Health, Education and Community Development for 
the Developing Countries: The Baqai Model’ by M. Z. Khan and P . Baillie (available at 
 Ø http://www .educationforhealth.net/EfHArticleArchive/1357-6283_
v16n1s11_713665178.pdf ).
Addressing Diversity in Schools: Culturally Responsive Pedagogy’ (available from 
 Ø http://www .nccrest.org/Briefs/Diversity_Brief.pdf).

56
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
In Faculty Resources 
Faculty Resources
Culturally Responsive Pedagogy
Week 9, session 17: School as a social, cultural, and 
community institution
Option 1
Ask Student Teachers to work with a partner to compare and contrast the culture of  
three different types of  school: public schools, private schools, and madrassas. To help 
guide the discussion, have them think about the following:
• the attitudes and beliefs of  people inside the school and in the external environment
• the cultural norms of  the school
• the relationships between people within the school. 
If  possible, have them compare specific local examples of  each type of  school.
Conclude by discussing the elements of  school culture that Student Teachers think are 
important for children’s development and learning.
Option 2
Assign G. M. Arif ’s ‘Production of  Cognitive Life Skills in Public, Private, and NGO 
Schools in Pakistan’ from Pakistan Development Review as a pre-class reading. (The 
article is available at http://www .pide.org.pk/pdf/PDR/2003/Volume1/1-28.pdf.) 
Discuss the similarities and differences between the systems in terms of  their social 
and cultural standing in Pakistani society . Which school system is culturally more 
acceptable? Why? 
Week 9, session 18: Effects of schools on communities 
and communities on schools
Option 1
Have Student Teachers read ‘ A New Wave of  Evidence: The Impact of  School, Family , 
and Community Connections on Student Achievement’ (available at http://www .
sedl.org/connections/resources/evidence.pdf). This is a research document that 
provides evidence on the effect of  school, family , and community on student achieve-
ment. The material can be used in number of  ways. For example, suggest that Student 
Teachers read the article while considering how it might be applicable in Pakistan. 
Additionally , they can analyse the applicability effective strategies to connect schools, 
families, and community .

COURSE GUIDE: School, Community , and Teacher
57
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Option 2
Ask Student Teachers to recall their own schooling experiences and observations by 
considering the following questions:
• Did they experience or observe any strategies to connect schools, families, and  
 community implemented by their schools? 
• If  yes, what strategies were implemented and with what results? 
• What was the response of  families and the community? 
• If  they did not observe or experience any such efforts by their school, what   
 could be the reasons? 
Try probing the reasons related to school, families, and community separately . 
Some of  the earlier discussion points from Session 17 can also be brought in to 
expand the discussion.
Week 10, session 19: School as a hub for community 
services
Option 1
Assign ‘The School as Community Hub: Beyond Education Iron Cage’ (available 
from http://www .policyalternatives.ca/sites/default/files/uploads/publications/
ourselves/docs/OSOS_Summer10_Preview .pdf) as a pre-class reading. This 
introduces the idea of  public schools being hubs for communities. Some Student 
Teachers may not be very familiar with these ideas in Pakistan. 
Discuss the possibilities of  such ‘hubs’ in Pakistani communities.
Option 2
Have Student Teachers read ‘ An Integrated Approach Through Health, Education 
and Community Development for the Developing Countries: The Baqai Model’ 
by M. Z. Khan and P . Baillie (available at http://www .educationforhealth.net/
EfHArticleArchive/1357-6283_v16n1s11_713665178.pdf). This article is helpful in 
discussing the role of  a school as a hub for community services.

58
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 10, session 20
• A critical analysis of  the effective roles of  school and teachers in  
 Pakistani communities
• Review of  Unit 4
Option 1
Ask Student Teachers to read ‘ Addressing Diversity in Schools: Culturally Responsive 
Pedagogy’ (available from http://www .nccrest.org/Briefs/Diversity_Brief.pdf). This 
document outlines culturally responsive pedagogies. 
Discuss how these strategies can be applied in Pakistan. Have Student Teachers 
suggest how these pedagogies can be contextualized.
Option 2
If  you have access, take Student Teachers to visit a community-based school. Spend a 
school day there. Observe teaching and learning in different classes. Interview a few 
teachers and pose the following questions:
• Are they local or from somewhere else?
• How do they interact with community members? 
• How does community get involved in the management of  school? 
• What degree of  autonomy teachers enjoy? 
Student Teachers will write detailed reports in pairs or individually . If  you choose this 
option, you can also examine the content area covered in session 18. 
Note on the research laboratory
The Instructor should start allocating time for Student Teachers to share their prelim-
inary findings. (Set aside time in each class for a certain number of  Student Teachers.) 
Both the Instructor and peers should give feedback. 

 UNIT     5  SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS

60
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit overview
In this unit Student Teachers will examine the interrelated and interdependent nature 
of  the beliefs and practices that connect schools, families, and religious institutions.
UNIT 5: Social institutions
Week # T opics/themes
11
Definition and types of  social institutions 
The family
Educational institutions 
Religious institutions 
12
Critical analysis of  the role of  social institutions in Pakistani schools
Review of  Unit 5
Learning goals
 l understand the roles of  family in relation to community and schools
 l identify cultural and religious practices that influence teaching and learning  
 in Pakistan
 l recognize the cultural, social, and religious context of  Pakistani society and its   
 influence on education in general and the community in particular.
Essential questions
• How does religion influence education?
• How do opinion makers in the community influence religious values and   
 beliefs? How are they influenced by religious values and beliefs? 
• How can religious institutions be involved in promoting the development of   
 all learners?
Assessments
• Class discussions 
• Class assignments 
• Observation journal entries
¡¡ Each week Student Teachers will write a one-page reflection of  their observations.
¡¡ Some guiding questions for the weekly journal entry are listed in each sub-topic. 

COURSE GUIDE: School, Community , and Teacher
61
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
• Journal reflections; consider the following reflection questions:
¡¡ Is there diversity in the classroom? 
¡¡ How are different students treated differently? 
¡¡ Do different students participate differently?
¡¡ What does the teacher do to encourage girls’ engagement and participation? 
Week 11, session 21: Definition and types of social 
institutions 
Sociology chapters on social institutions and society and the changing role of  family 
could be used as pre-class readings for this unit. (See Recommended Readings on the 
syllabus for a list of  textbooks.) 
Weeks 11 and 12 will focus on how parents, teachers, school, religion, and society 
interact with each other and how these interactions affect students’ learning. 
Option 1
Exploring terms and concepts (10 minutes) 
Discuss the terms social institutions and institutional influences to ensure that Student 
Teachers understand them.
Social institutions ‘refer to complex social forms that reproduce themselves such as gov-
ernments, the family , human languages, universities, hospitals, business corporations, 
and legal systems’ (from the Stanford Encyclopedia of  Philosophy at 
 Ø http://plato.stanford.edu/).
Institutional influences are the influences these institutions exert. These might be 
influences might be explicit (or on purpose) or implicit.
Mapping institutional influences (40 minutes)
Make a diagram with Student Teachers about the institutional influences on student 
learning in their community . Alternatively , have Student Teachers to work in groups 
to make their own map. If  the class works in small groups, provide the following give 
instructions for each step:
• Make a list of  social institutions in the community such as the family , religion,  
 and government. 
• Discuss and make a list of  the ways in which these institutions influence learning. 
• Think about the scale of  their influence. 
• Draw a child in the centre of  the board or chart paper.
• If  an item has a big influence on learning, draw a large circle around it on the   
 board. If  an item has a small influence on learning, draw a small circle around it  
 on the board.

62
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Make sure that Student Teachers think about both positive and negative influences 
and how social institutions influence each other. 
If  you did this with groups, have them compare their diagrams. Do their diagrams all 
look the same?
Option 2
This option involves a reading-based discussion combined with Student Teachers’ 
personal reflections.
Self-reflection (5 minutes) 
Student Teachers reflect on their own familial experiences and answer one or both of  
the following questions:
• What role do children play in your family? 
• What roles do nuclear and extended families play in your family?
Pair work (10 minutes) 
Student Teachers work with a partner and spend five minutes each sharing their reflections.
Lecture (30 minutes) 
Review the major roles and functions of  the family in Pakistani society . Emphasize the 
following issues:
• diversity in the family system in Pakistan
• traditions, customs, societal setup in different parts of  the country (rural, urban)
• differences within society and within families living in the same regions.
Group brainstorm (10 minutes) 
Participants work in small groups to create a list of  how diversity , differences in 
traditions, and the like affect schools and schooling practices in Pakistan. Groups then 
share their list with the class or write their list on the board. 
Week 11, session 22: Educational and religious institutions
Option 1
Ask Student Teachers to name the schools they attended and whether the school was 
public, private, religious, or community based. It is likely that there will be Student 
Teachers from at least three types of  institutions.
As Student Teachers recall their experiences, ask them to list the positive and negative 
characteristics of  their schools. Then, divide the class into small groups according to 
their school backgrounds and let them discuss the negatives and positives of  their school 
type. Ask them if  a masjid can be a school by itself. Have them explain their answers.
In an interactive lecture discuss the problems and potentials of  each educational system. 
Refer to Student Teachers occasionally for supporting evidence based on their experiences.
Make sure the systems not represented in class are not left out of  the discussion.

COURSE GUIDE: School, Community , and Teacher
63
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Option 2
As a pre-class assignment, have Student Teachers read the article by I. Farah, 
‘Public–Private Partnerships: Implications for Primary Schooling in Pakistan’ in 
Social Policy & Administration .
Ask Student Teachers which type of  school they would have chosen if  they could go 
back in time. They should explain their answers.
Based on their explanations, draft a list of  desirable characteristics for school on the 
board. Then, assign Student Teachers to different school systems and have them 
compile a list of  negative aspects of  each system. 
Next, they should prepare a plan to improve these deficiencies. Make sure the plan 
includes the teacher as one of  the most proactive working members. 
Week 12, session 23: Critical analysis of the role of social 
institutions in Pakistani schools
Option 1
Divide Student Teachers into four groups: family , state, religion (state and minority), 
and civil society . Each group should prepare a progress report of  the workings of  
these institutions in relation to schools. The reports should address the following 
questions (as appropriate):
• How have families helped/ hindered education in Pakistan? 
• What role has the state played in promoting schools and schooling in Pakistan? 
• How has religion helped/hindered the cause of  education in Pakistan? 
• How active/inactive has civil society been in promoting education? 
Option 2
Divide Student Teachers into five groups: family , state, religion (state and minority), 
citizens, and prosecutors. Prosecutors will comprise the largest group and will pros-
ecute the other four groups in court on the charges that these institutions have failed 
today’s students. 
The prosecutor group will be divided into four sub-groups that will prepare charges 
against the family , state, religion, and citizens. The other four groups will prepare 
arguments in their own defence. Allow each group to prepare for the trial. 
Assignment
Have Student Teachers select one of  the institutions and collect a series of  newspa-
per articles that follow a particular story related to that institution. Ask them to be 
prepared to discuss coverage in different papers. In what ways will the situation have 
an impact on community and on schools?

64
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 12, session 24: Review of Unit 5
Option 1
As an exercise, involve the whole class in preparation of  review questions (essay or 
multiple-choice questions). Make sure questions relate to all concepts covered in Unit 5. 
Option 2
Have Student Teachers write a newspaper article discussing the challenges of  student 
life and how social institutions (or a given social institution) can support them.
Note on the research laboratory
The Instructor should start allocating time for Student Teachers to share their prelim-
inary findings. (Set aside time in each class for a certain number of  Student Teachers.) 
Both the Instructor and peers should give feedback. 

 UNIT     6  THE TEACHER’S ROLE IN 
 SCHOOL AND 
 THE COMMUNITY

66
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit overview
Student Teachers will identify prerequisites for collaborative working conditions that 
promote a culture of  inclusion in schools as well as the community . They will re-con-
ceptualize their own role as change agents.
UNIT 6: The teacher’s role in school and the community
Week # T opics/themes
13
Teacher as an integral part of  the community
Teacher as a change agent in:
• Community
• School
14
Teachers as role models through their participation in 
community activities
Effects of  teachers and schools on individual and group behaviour
Review of  Unit 6
Learning goals
 l recognize how culture, gender, special needs, and equity and equality issues affect  
 the school and the community
 l identify the mechanism or social networks for promoting inclusive culture in schools.
Essential questions
• How do the community and school interact to influence education?
• How do teachers influence opinion makers in the community? 
• How can the community be involved in promoting the development of    
 all learners?
Assessments
• Class discussions 
• Class assignments 
• Observation journal entries
¡¡ Each week Student Teachers will write a one-page reflection of  their observations.
¡¡ Some guiding questions for the weekly journal entry are listed in each sub-topic. 

COURSE GUIDE: School, Community , and Teacher
67
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
• Journal reflections; consider the following reflection questions:
¡¡ Is there diversity in the classroom? 
¡¡ How are different students treated differently? 
¡¡ Do different students participate differently?
¡¡ What does the teacher do to encourage girls’ engagement and participation? 
Resources
M. A. Buzdar, A. Ali, and M. Nadeem, ‘Educating Women’s Rights Through Teacher 
Education in Pakistan: Reality or Paradox’, International Online Journal of  Educational 
Sciences, 3 (2011), 918–29. 
A. B. Muhammad and A. Akhtar, ‘Teacher as Community Mobilizer: Case of  Primary 
School Teachers in Punjab (Pakistan)’, International Online Journal of  Educational 
Sciences, 3 (2011), 448–60. 
R. Qureshi and F . Shamim (eds.), Schools and Schooling Practices in Pakistan: Lessons for 
Policy and Practice (Karachi: Oxford University Press, 2008). 
Week 13, session 25: T eacher as an integral part of 
community
Option 1
Assign different readings from the edited book by A. Bashiruddin and J. Retallick, 
Becoming Teacher Educators to small groups. Each chapter of  the book contains the 
narrative of  an individual teacher. In a short interactive presentation, have the groups 
compare similarities and differences in the motivations and background characteristics 
of  each teacher. 
Ask Student Teachers to identify factors that would make these individuals stand out 
in their local communities, their professional communities (community of  teachers), 
and the academic community (researchers, educationists) and among policymakers. 
In an active lecture, elicit information from Student Teachers about their understand-
ing of  the multidimensionality of  community and community membership. 
Option 2
Guest speaker(s)
Invite a member or office bearer from a teachers association. This individual’s presen-
tation should focus on the organization’s role in promoting professional development 
for teachers, establishing linkages between and among major stakeholders, and 
promoting home–school linkages. 
Have a parent, who is also a teacher, on the panel to speak for both the community 
of  parents and teachers. (If  possible, have a male and female teacher/parent to have 
both perspectives.)

68
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Moderate the discussion to bring out different dimensions of  teachers  
and their communities.
Week 13, session 26: T eacher as a change agent in 
Communities and Schools
Option 1
Prepare a handout that covers the main points of  ‘Overcoming Exclusion through 
Inclusive Approaches in Education: A Challenge and a Vision’ (available from http://
unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0013/001347/134785e.pdf). Give Student Teachers the 
handout and ask them to prepare a plan for promoting inclusion in schools. 
Option 2
Divide a copy of  Education Exclusion and Inclusion: Policy and Implementation in 
South Africa and India (available from http://www .dfid.gov .uk/r4d/PDF/Outputs/
impAccess/ResearchingtheIssuesNo72.pdf) into multiple sections and assign Student 
Teachers different parts as a jigsaw reading in class. 
After they have shared information, divide the class into three groups: one represent-
ing South Africa, one India, and one Pakistan. 
Have a tripartite conference. Let groups representing South Africa and India present 
their cases. Then have the Pakistan group prepare recommendations for the Pakistan 
Education Ministry as to what could work for Pakistan in the light of  the examples of  
these two developing countries. The emphasis of  the recommendations should be on 
the role of  teachers. 
Week 14, session 27: T eachers as role models through 
their participation in community activities
Option 1
Individual reflection (15 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to discuss their memories of  teachers with a partner. Share the 
following questions (on the board or on a flipchart): 
• What were the (good/bad) attributes of  the teacher?
• How did characteristics affect their style of  teaching, especially the way they   
 communicated and interacted with students?
• How did the teacher contribute to your learning and intellectual growth?
After 5–10 minutes, have each pair join with another pair to share their ideas with 
each other. 
Whole-class discussion (5 minutes)
Based on these descriptions, what generalizations can be made about things that 
teachers do to promote student development or to hinder it?

COURSE GUIDE: School, Community , and Teacher
69
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6UNIT 2 UNIT 7
Lecture (20 minutes)
Use the generalizations Student Teachers have offered to build the profile of  a good 
teacher in terms of  their role in the community . Include information from research 
studies and articles on teacher quality .
Ask Student Teachers whether community affects student learning. They should 
explain their answers. There are no correct or incorrect responses.
Wrap up the discussion by asking about the teacher’s role in connecting school 
and community .
Option 2
Review Standard 8 in the NPSTP (15 minutes)
Ask Student Teachers to work in pairs to review Standard 8, about collaboration and 
partnerships, in the National Professional Standards for Teachers in Pakistan (NPSTP). 
Ask them to identify the skills, knowledge, and dispositions that teachers need to 
connect school and community . 
Discuss their responses in a whole-class discussion.
Finding evidence (20 minutes)
In the same pairs, ask Student Teachers to discuss and list evidence that would indicate a 
teacher is reaching this standard. For example, one of  the standards listed is ‘Recognizing 
the role of  parents, guardians and other family members as a child’s teacher’. 
Teachers who meet this standard might do the following:
• Talk about and refer to learning children have done outside of  school (e.g. at   
 home) as part of  instruction.
• Meet parents regularly to discuss a child’s progress at school. 
• Involve parents and other family members in children’s learning – for example, by  
 asking children to read aloud for 10 minutes every day to someone in their family .
This is evidence for this standard.
Report back (15 minutes)
Select one or two Student Teachers to be scribes. 
Invite pairs to share evidence for each of  the standard statements that relate to the role 
of  the teacher in building partnerships between school and community . Scribes should 
record these. Ask the pairs not to repeat evidence that had already been shared.
Close (5 minutes)
Review the importance of  the teacher in building the partnership between school and 
community . Teachers must take the initiative because parents and other community 
members may be anxious about getting involved in school or with their children’s 
education, as they may believe, incorrectly , that they should leave things to the experts 
when they too might be experts.

70
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6 UNIT 2UNIT 7
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Week 14, session 28: Effects of teachers and schools on 
individual and group behaviour
Option 1
Conduct a reading-based discussion using a chapter from Qureshi and Shamim’s 
Schools and Schooling Practices in Pakistan: Lessons for Policy and Practice. Discuss the 
successes and challenges schools face in making a difference to communities.
Option 2
Pre-class assignment
Divide Student Teachers into groups of  three. Assign each group a region of  the 
world such as Sub-Saharan Africa, North Africa, South-East Asia, South America, 
Latin America, South Asia, Western Europe, Eastern Europe, and China. Have 
Student Teachers search the Internet for at least five success stories of  schools (in their 
selected region) that improved the lives of  students and the community .
Each group should prepare and make a brief  presentation (no more than five minutes) 
highlighting the problems encountered, the solutions applied, and the main players involved. 
Note on the research laboratory
The Instructor should start allocating time for Student Teachers to share their prelim-
inary findings. (Set aside time in each class for a certain number of  Student Teachers.) 
Both the Instructor and peers should give feedback. By this time, almost all Student 
Teachers should have finished their initial presentations.

 UNIT     7  THE WORKING CONTEXT 
 OF PAKISTANI TEACHERS

72
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6UNIT 7 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit overview
The focus of  this unit will be on the non-traditional roles of  Pakistani teachers within 
their actual work contexts. Student Teachers will distinguish teachers’ traditional roles 
(within the classroom only) from their non-traditional roles outside the classroom 
(e.g. teacher as a community mobilizer or social activist). They will also examine the 
formal and informal leadership roles that teachers could perform.
UNIT 7: The working context of  Pakistani teachers
Week # T opics/themes
15
Teacher as a social activist 
Teacher’s leadership roles within and outside schools
16
Teacher’s role in establishing linkages among stakeholders
Review of  Unit 7
Learning goals
 l understand the proactive nature of  a teacher’s role in and for students’ achievement
 l identify social networks that could influence teaching and learning in schools
 l recognize the contextual role of  Pakistani teachers in improving education in the   
 country in general and community in particular.
Essential questions
• How do teachers play leadership roles in the community and school?
• How do community networks collaborate with school networks?
Assessments
• Class discussions 
• Class assignments 
• Observation journal entries
¡¡ Each week Student Teachers will write a one-page reflection of  their observations.
¡¡ Some guiding questions for the weekly journal entry are listed in each sub-topic. 
• Journal reflections; consider the following reflection questions:
¡¡ Is there diversity in the classroom? 
¡¡ How are different students treated differently? 
¡¡ Do different students participate differently?
¡¡ What does the teacher do to encourage girls’ engagement and participation? 

COURSE GUIDE: School, Community , and Teacher
73
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6 UNIT 7UNIT 2
Resources
R. Qureshi and F . Shamim (eds.), Schools and Schooling Practices in Pakistan: Lessons for 
Policy and Practice (Karachi: Oxford University Press, 2008).
Z. Bana et al., ‘Exploring Indigenous Leadership Practices: Case Study of  School 
Principals in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province’, in A. Bashiruddin, Z. Bana, and A. 
K. Afridi (eds.), Education in Pakistan: Learning from Research Practices (Karachi: Oxford 
University Press, 2012).
M. A. Buzdar and A. Ali, ‘Teacher as Community Mobilizer: Case of  Primary School 
Teachers in Punjab Pakistan’, International Online Journal of  Educational Sciences, 3 
(2011), 448–60.
M. Shaaban and R. Qureshi, in S. Ali and M. Rizvi (eds.), Conference Proceedings, Aga 
Khan University Institute of  Educational Development Publication (2005).
Week 15, session 29: T eacher as a social activist 
Option 1
If  possible, take Student Teachers to a Parent–Teacher Association or School 
Management Committee meeting. Let them observe the interactions. Have them 
note who leads the discussion and who makes the decisions. 
If  possible, ask them to make a diagram. The diagram should include communica-
tion lines highlighting the connections (and frequency of  connections) between the 
teacher and other stakeholders, as observed in the meeting. This type of  diagram is a 
sociometric diagram. More information about how to create them is available at 
 Ø http://www .curriculumsupport.education.nsw .gov .au/secondary/pdhpe/assets/
pdf/tlsupp_004.pdf.
Discuss the role of  each stakeholder in relation to teacher during that specific 
meeting, and suggest what other roles the teachers may take on – depending on the 
context of  the discussion and the stakeholders involved.
Option 2
Get the meeting record, with minutes, from a Parent–Teacher Association or School 
Management Committee meeting. Have Student Teachers analyse the minutes in 
terms of  who leads the discussion, who makes the decisions, and who decides on the 
agenda. Ask them to consider the role of  women in the meeting.

74
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6UNIT 7 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
As Student Teachers review the minutes, ask them to do the following:
• Draw a mapping diagram of  the communication patterns (i.e., your diagram   
 should reflect who gives orders to whom, who is consulted, who gets resources  
 from whom, etc.) reflected in the minutes. Make a list of  the agenda points.   
 Note the most discussed and least discussed issues.
• Discuss the relevance of  the agenda points to the issues of  schools and its   
 students. Do they converge? Diverge?
Discuss the role of  each stakeholder, especially teachers, in solving problems related 
to the school and its students. Suggest how teachers can acquire a greater role in 
decision making.
Week 15, session 30: T eacher’s leadership roles within 
and outside schools
Ask Student Teachers to name a leader they like. Have them to prepare a list of  the 
characteristics that make that person a leader. Student Teachers should then exchange 
their lists. 
Ask whether teachers can be leaders. Student Teachers should explain their answers. 
For example, if  they agree that teachers can be leaders, ask what leadership roles they 
play in the school and the community .
Have Student Teachers consider if  there is a difference between leadership positions 
and roles. Again, they should explain their answers. 
Build your discussion of  teachers’ leadership roles by drawing on information from 
research articles such as ‘Exploring Indigenous Leadership Practices: Case Study of  
School Principals in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province’. 
Week 16, session 31: T eacher’s role in establishing linkage 
among stakeholders
Option 1
Working in pairs, have Student Teachers search the Internet for case studies on 
teachers who have successfully mobilized (rural or urban) communities around issues 
related to education. Alternatively , the pairs can also write the story of  a local teacher 
they know or have heard about. 
Note: Just one option is given for this session. 

COURSE GUIDE: School, Community , and Teacher
75
UNIT 1 UNIT 4 UNIT 5UNIT 3 UNIT 6 UNIT 7UNIT 2
The pairs should also prepare a short presentation to be shared in class, which should 
cover the following: 
• the community’s socio-economic profile 
• the issue involved
• the teacher’s role in identifying support, organizing groups, and finding resources
• the role of  community institutions in identifying support, organizing groups,   
 and finding resources.
Notice the similarities and differences among the case studies and highlight these in an 
interactive lecture eliciting information from Student Teachers to fill the gaps.
Option 2
Assign Budzar and Ali’s ‘Teacher as Community Mobilizer: Case of  Primary School 
Teachers in Punjab Pakistan’ as a pre-class reading, and provide guiding questions. Use 
the questions to generate a whole-class discussion. 
In small groups of  three to five, have Student Teachers search the Internet to find 
articles about teachers as social mobilizers. They should then compare and contrast 
these articles with the information from Buzdar and Ali. Ask each group to share the 
articles they find with the whole class. If  there is no Internet access, the instructor 
should bring a range of  articles to class for Student Teachers to review .
Wrap up the discussion by highlighting the movers and shakers found in different 
communities, and emphasize the proactive role of  school teachers.
Week 16, session 32: Review of Unit 7
Option 1
Student Teachers take the lead in the last session. Divide the class into groups of  
three to review and present one of  the concepts discussed in sessions 29–31. They 
should choose the concepts that interested them the most. Encourage them to choose 
different strategies to make their presentations. 

76
UNIT 1UNIT 4UNIT 5 UNIT 3UNIT 6UNIT 7 UNIT 2
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Option 2
Divide the class into four groups.
Ask each group to generate a set of  questions to assess knowledge and understanding 
of  concepts in the course. Encourage them to generate questions that encourage 
higher-order thinking. Each group should aim to generate at least three questions.
Two groups then exchange questions with each other, and the other two groups 
exchange their questions. Each group takes turn responding to the questions from the 
other group. (Again, consider asking two groups to work outside the classroom so 
that everyone can hear what is being said.)
Note on the research laboratory
At the end of  the course the Instructor should allocate time for Student Teachers to 
make their final presentation. Consider inviting the communities and schools involved 
to the presentation so that they may learn about the findings. However, this presentation 
should be separate from the research portion of  the presentation that will be assessed. 
(Also, the research portion will likely use academic language and terms that are not 
suitable for a general audience.) 

Methods 
and Strategies

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
78
The following is a list of  some of  the strategies used in this course to encourage 
active learning. 
Active lecturing. An active lecture is not too different from any good lecture, but it 
attempts to directly involve listeners. 
There is no one best way to give an active lecture, but it involves any of  the 
following techniques.
Give information in small chunks (about 10 minutes), and then have class members 
do something with that information for a few minutes. Here are some examples of  
activities, which you can repeat or vary:
• Write a one-minute reaction to what you have just heard. 
¡¡ Talk to the person next to you about what you heard and see how your   
 perspectives differ. Do you agree? Do you have questions?
• List as many key points as you can remember.
• Compare notes taken during the chunk. Help each other fill in gaps or determine  
 if  crucial information is missing. (Some people do not allow note taking during   
 the lecture, but this is up to the Instructor.)
Give out cards or slips of  paper in three different colours. When class members are 
listening to your comments, have them hold up a colour for ‘I understand’, ‘I don’t 
understand’, or ‘I disagree’. Then either stop and allow questions or adjust what 
you are saying so there are more ‘understand’ colours showing. This is particularly 
effective with large groups of  50 or more people.
Ambassadors . This is a useful way to get groups or individuals to exchange infor-
mation. Two or more members move from one group to another to share/compare 
discussion etc. You may wish to have half  of  each group move to another group. This 
is especially useful if  you do not have ample time for a whole-class discussion.
Brainstorming . This is a technique for generating creative ideas on a topic. It may be 
an individual activity or organized as a group activity . Give people a limited amount 
of  time (e.g. one minute) to say or write as many ideas as they can on a topic. No mat-
ter how unrelated an idea seems, write it down. (Alternatively , the Instructor might 
ask the whole class to brainstorm and write all the ideas on the board.) After the brief  
period of  brainstorming, ideas may then be analysed, organized, and discussed. This 
is often used as a problem-solving technique. Ideas are then analysed in light of  how 
useful they might be in solving the problem. 
Gallery walk . This is a strategy that borrows its name from a visit to an art gallery . 
Students walk through an exhibit of  posters, artefacts, or display of  items they have 
completed. They can be directed to take notes. The idea is to thoughtfully look at 
what is displayed.
Graffiti wall. A graffiti wall may be displayed in the classroom for use all term. Students 
may write their thoughts, feelings, or expressions before or following each session and 
sign their name. Anonymous comments are not suitable. Ideas generated in class may 

79
 METHODS AND STRATEGIES : School, Community, and T eacher
be posted on the ‘wall’. Use paper from a large roll of  craft or newsprint paper or join 
several cardboard boxes together to make a wall that can be stored between sessions. 
Students can take turns getting and putting away the wall each session.
Group work: some tips for forming instructional groups. There is no one best way 
to form groups. The best way for you is the way that suits your purpose. Use a more 
complicated strategy if  students need a break or need to be energized. Use a simple 
technique if  time is short. Ways to form groups include the following:
• Ask people to count off  from one to five (depending on the number of  people  
 you want in a group). Groups will form based on their number (e.g. all of  the  
 ones will gather together).
• Before class, determine how many people you want in a group or how many   
 groups you need. Give each class member a different coloured sticker, star, or  
 dot as they enter the class. Then when it is time to form groups, ask them to   
 find people with the same sticker etc. and sit together.
• Put different coloured bits of  paper in a cup or jar on each table. Have people  
 take one and find people in the room with the same colour to form a group.
• Have students get together with everybody born in the same month as they were.
• Make adjustments to the groups as needed.
Mini-lecture . A mini-lecture contains all the components of  a good lecture. It is 
sharply focused. It begins with an introduction that provides an overview of  what you 
will talk about. It offers examples and illustrations of  each point. It concludes with a 
summary of  the main point(s). 
One-minute paper . Ask class members to write for one minute on a particular topic 
(e.g. their reflections on a topic, an assigned subject). They are to focus on writing 
their ideas, without worrying about grammar and spelling. A one-minute paper differs 
from brainstorming because there is more focus. 
Pair-share. Use this technique when you want two class members to work together 
to share ideas or accomplish a task. Simply ask them to work with a neighbour or 
have them find a partner based on some other criteria. It is very useful when you want 
people to quickly exchange ideas without disrupting the flow of  the class. (Sharing in 
triads and foursomes are also small group techniques.)
Poster session . This is useful when you want students to organize their thoughts on 
a topic and present it to others in a quick but focused way . Have individuals or small 
groups work to create a poster to explain or describe something. For example, if  they 
have been doing an inquiry on a particular topic, they would want to include their 
focus, methods, and outcomes, along with colourful illustrations or photographs. 
The poster can be self-explanatory or students can use it to explain their work. As an 
in-class tool, a poster session is often combined with a gallery walk so that the class 
may review a number of  posters in a short time.

ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
80
Readers’ theatre . Readers’ theatre is a group dramatic reading from a text. Readers 
take turns reading all or parts of  a passage. The focus is on oral expression of  the part 
being read rather than on acting and costumes. Readers’ theatre is a way to bring a 
text to life. 
It is a good idea to go over passages to be read aloud with students so they are familiar 
with any difficult words. 
Sometimes a readers theatre is used to get student interested in a text. They hear 
passages read first and then read the longer text. 
KWL. This is a strategy that provides a structure for recalling what students know (K) 
about a topic, noting what students want to know (W), and finally listing what has 
already been learned and is yet to be learned (L).
The KWL strategy allows students to take inventory of  what they already know and 
what they want to know . Students can categorize information about the topic that 
they expect to use as they progress through a lesson or unit.
Text-against-text. This is a way of  helping students learn to analyse and compare 
written documents. The idea is to look at two documents and search for overlap, con-
firmation, or disagreement. It is a way of  looking at different perspectives. Sometimes 
it is useful to give students readings prior to class and ask them to compare the 
readings based on a set of  study questions, such as:
1) Look at each author separately . What do you think the author’s main point is? 
2) How does the author support his/her argument? 
3) Look at the authors together. In what ways do the authors agree? 
4) What are their points of  disagreement?
5) What is your opinion on the issue? 
Text-against-text may be used to compare a new reading or new information with 
material that has already been covered. 
In classrooms where the whole class uses a single textbook, Instructors often find 
they are teaching against what is in the textbook. Sometimes it is hard for students to 
accept that a textbook can and should be questioned. Putting together a text-against-
text activity using the textbook and outside materials (e.g. an article) can help them 
understand that there are legitimate differences of  opinion on a subject. Articles 
need not contradict each other. They may be about the same topic, but offer students 
different ways of  seeing a subject.
Another way to use the activity is divide the class into groups, give each a set of  
materials, and have them debate the texts. Some university faculty like to put together 
text sets that include both scholarly and non-scholarly works and have students to 
think about differences. For example, you might provide all students – regardless of  
their reading level or learning style – with easy-to-read materials as a way to intro-
duce themselves to a topic. Even competent adult learners seek out ‘easy’ books or 

81
materials to learn about a new or complex topic. Providing a picture, newspaper 
article, or even a children’s book in a text set might give everyone the means of  
connecting to or understanding some aspect of  the larger subject. 
Roundtable technique . For this technique, divide the class into small groups (i.e. 
four to six people), with one person appointed as the recorder. A question that has 
many possible answers is posed, and class members are given time to think about the 
answers. After the thinking period, members of  the team share their responses with 
one another. The recorder writes the group’s answers. The person next to the record-
er starts and each person in the group (in order) gives an answer until time is called. 
Quizzes. Prepare and give a short quiz (15 minutes) over the different aspects of  
teachers’ roles in the community covered in the unit. As students take the quiz, ask 
them to circle items they are unsure of. They can review and discuss their work in the 
following ways:
• Triads. Have students meet in groups of  three to review the quizzes so that   
 they can help each other with their weak areas. (10 minutes)
• Review. Go over the quiz with students, and have them look at their own   
 work and make corrections. (30 minutes)
¡¡ Notice points class members had difficulty remembering and take time to   
 review them. You may ask students to assist with this and discuss how they  
 were able to remember.
¡¡ Use this time to correct any misconceptions.
¡¡ Have students save their quiz for future study .
METHODS AND STRATEGIES : School, Community, and T eacher

Faculty Resources

T able of Contents
Introduction 85
 
UNIT 1  Home and School Relationships, Carrington (2008) 86
  Faculty Resource
 Causes of Deteriorating Standard of Education in 
 Balochistan: A Review of Jabeen and Malik (2003)  116    
  Student T eacher Reading
 Quality of Primary Education in Pakistan: 
 Executive Summary (2003)  118    
  Faculty Resource
 Problems in Universalization of Primary Education 
 in Pakistan: A Review of Khan (2010)  120   
  Student T eacher Reading 
 Problems in Universalization of Primary Education  122    
  Student Handout 
 Fact Sheet: A Summary of the Rights Under 
 the Convention on the Rights of the Child  123    
  Faculty Resource 
 
UNIT 2 Socialization and Child Development 129
  Student T eacher Reading
 Models of Communication Process  131 
  Faculty Resource
  Social Interaction 147
  Student T eacher Reading
 What Is Peace Education?: Working Paper  150    
  Faculty Resource 
 
UNIT 3 Language and Thought Processes 152
  Faculty Resource
 The Culture of School and the Challenge of Diversity  156  
  Student T eacher Reading
 Is Media Changing Society and Culture in Pakistan?  159    
  Student T eacher Reading
   
UNIT 4 Culturally Responsive Pedagogy 161
  Faculty Resource
FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
85
Introduction to faculty resources
Faculty Resources is a collection of  readings and materials to supplement the course, 
School, Community, and Teacher. It includes readings for students in the course as well 
as faculty resources. The resources for faculty include notes, readings, classroom 
activities, and additional materials such as handouts. The Student Teacher Readings 
are drawn from diverse sources and include articles from both academic and popular 
media, worksheets, and other materials. Faculty Resources is organized by unit so 
that the readings and materials parallel the structure of  the course. In some cases, 
reflection questions are included at the conclusion of  readings to help guide student in 
thinking about content. 
Most resources and readings are matched to a particular session. Faculty will find 
them listed under the lesson options in the faulty planning guide. Not all readings and 
resources have been assigned to specific course sessions, however. Many are included 
to provide choices and extra information. In some cases, a reading or resource will be 
used in multiple sessions. Where this is the case, it is included in the resource collec-
tion where it is first used. 
Unless otherwise noted, each resource was prepared by a course writer. The resources 
are for educational purposes only and for use with the Course Guide for the School, 
Community, and Teacher course. They may not be included in other works.
They are for educational purposes only and may not be included in other works 
offered for sale. Faculty are free, however, to duplicate and distribute them to students 
as needed.

86
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
F
Unit 1, week 1, session 1  Faculty Resource
Excerpt from ‘Home, School and 
Community Relationships’
The following section is excerpted from ‘Home, School and Community 
Relationships’, chapter 12 in Suzanne Carrington’s Home and School Relationships. 
In this article by Suzanne Carrington, a professor at the Queensland University of  
Technology in Brisbane, Australia, talks about school and community in ways that 
may be useful for you and your students. She also helps us to think about inclusive 
education and how it can be applied to the school and community .
What you will learn in this chapter
This chapter focuses on the development of  inclusive relationships between homes, 
schools, and communities. Collaboration, team work, and good communication have 
long been recognised as important qualities for teachers and a characteristic of  high-per-
forming schools. We know that when teachers collaborate and solve problems, they 
develop new knowledge together that can lead to curriculum reform and transforma-
tion of  teaching for social change. More recently , schools are described as communities 
made up of  teachers, students, parents, specialists, and support staff  that are embedded 
within the culture of  the people in the neighbourhood. Business groups and community 
organisations are often involved in various ways in the life of  the school to provide direct 
support to the students and parents, and to benefit the greater community as a whole. 
Shared decision-making involving members of  the school community can empower and 
transform students’ lives. Communities that value and respect members and provide 
a safe learning environment for everyone to express their views, build awareness and 
develop capabilities together are more likely to be inclusive.
In this chapter, you will learn about:
• Developing inclusive relationships between teachers, students and parents;
• Ideas that encourage students to have a voice and be represented in processes  
 of  school review and development;
• Processes that facilitate engagement with parents and communities; and
• How teams of  specialist staff  can be involved in school activities. 
• Two case studies are presented to support the development of  a set of  ideas   
 and strategies that can be incorporated across the school sector. The case   
 studies illustrate how parents, students, and teachers can work together to   
 achieve shared outcomes from more inclusive schooling.
Before reading the case studies, it is necessary to know a little about The Index for 
Inclusion (Booth & Ainscow , 2002). This resource is designed to support schools in a 
process of  inclusive school development and was developed in the United Kingdom 
at the Centre for Studies in Inclusive Education (CSIE) in collaboration with the 
University of  Manchester and University of  Christ Church College Canterbury . The 
Note: FOR CLASSROOM USE ONLY . Used by permission of  author. 

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
87
Index provides a framework for school review and development on three dimensions: 
school culture, policy , and practice. A school culture includes beliefs, values, habits, 
and assumes ways of  doing things among the school community . Culture is the heart 
and soul of  a organization and can develop by osmosis or can be influenced by pur-
poseful leadership. Policy can include written expectations about how people work 
together, use resources, and provide educational programs for students in the school. 
Policy is usually informed by school and education organization priorities and plans. 
The dimension of  practice includes areas such as classroom ways of  orchestrating 
learning and roles and duties of  staff  in the school. 
The three dimensions overlap because developments in school culture require the 
formulation of  policies and the implementation of  practice. Each dimension of  
the Index is divided into a number of  indicators that can be considered as goals for 
achieving more inclusive schooling. Each indicator suggests a number of  questions 
that can be used to encourage thinking about various issues related to inclusive 
education. The detailed questions ensure that the materials can provoke thought on 
school issues, whatever its current state of  development. While the questions do not 
provide solutions for schools, they prompt people to think differently and to consider 
how the school could be improved to meet the needs of  the school community . The 
intent is threefold: to establish existing knowledge and community understandings 
about culture, policy and practice in the school; to consider priority areas for school 
and teacher development; and to manage and document the process of  change. There 
are five phases in the Index process:
• Phase 1 – Starting the Index process;
• Phase 2 – Finding out about the school; 
• Phase 3 – Producing an inclusive development plan;
• Phase 4 – Implementing developments; and 
• Phase 5—Reviewing the Index process.
The Index for Inclusion was used in the following two case studies.
Case studies
Gum Tree State School is an inner-city primary school with approximately 250 stu-
dents participating in a P-7 (primary , preschool, and special education) multi-age pro-
gram. This program means that students have access to a flexible, supportive learning 
environment and have the opportunity to progress at their own rate of  development. 
The school principal wanted to explore structures, policies, and practices so that the 
inclusion policy for the school would address key priorities.
A working party comprising the head of  special education services, a class teacher, 
a behaviour support services representative, the principal, parent representatives, 
and the education advisor (Inclusive Education) from the school district was formed. 
Opportunities at school staff  meetings were planned for all staff, including teacher aides, 
teachers, administrators, and specialists, to discuss their beliefs and understandings 
about inclusive education. This process is important because shared beliefs of  members 
of  the school community affect actions, which in turn affects the school culture. Open 
communication is fostered and members are encourage to feel comfortable and express 
opinions and thoughts on issues. The Index for Inclusion assisted in this process. Use of  

88
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
the Index encourages collaborative enquiry and assumes that all schools are at different 
points in the journey toward more inclusive school development.
A particular issue was identified during one of  the staff  meetings that became an early 
focus for the working party . Some staff  believed that teacher aide support did not focus suf-
ficiently on student learning and development. These staff  thought that the support model 
met the needs of  some audits and also caused many students with disabilities to become 
support-dependent. The education advisor (Inclusive Education) facilitated a workshop 
specifically for teacher aides. Activities and conversations, underpinned by the Index, 
challenged assumptions about the learning and participation of  students with disabilities 
and led to an acknowledgment that disability is one aspect only of  human difference. 
Teacher aides recognized that current support options had the potential to impede the 
learning and independence of  students. Ongoing discussions with support staff  extended 
and strengthened these views and provided opportunities to share and extend individual 
understandings of  inclusive education that supported future student aspirations.
In addition to the meeting with the teacher aides, layers of  data were collected from 
members of  the school community . Initially , a staff  survey created from the culture 
and policy dimensions of  the Index identified priority areas. The following areas were 
considered by the working party to be of  the highest priority because 12-25% of  staff  
respondents disagreed with the statement.
• Staff  professional development activities help staff  to respond to student diversity .
• Staff  treat each other with respect irrespective of  their roles in the school.
• Staff  feel valued and supported (50% of  teacher aides disagreed with this   
 compared with 15% of  teaching staff ).
• The staff ’s belief  in meeting diverse needs reduces the barriers to learning and  
 participation for all students (teachers and other groups disagreed more   
 strongly that teacher aides).
• Meetings involving staff, students, parents/carers, and others attempt to deal   
 with problems flexibly before they escalate (teacher aides and others disagreed  
 most strongly).
At Gum Tree State School, priorities and issues were also identified through parent and 
student questionnaires that were informed by the Index for Inclusion. The parent ques-
tionnaire was sent to every family in the school and deeper levels of  understanding were 
developed though Parent Forums. These forums were advertised through the school 
newsletters and internet site to consider specific issues such as communication between 
home and school and reporting on children’s progress. At the school, every student in 
Years 6 and 7 undertakes training at the beginning of  the school year to become a peer 
support leader. Peer support groups involve vertical groupings of  the whole school, 
with older students teaching and mentoring a multi-age group of  younger children, for 
a 30-minute lesson every week. Students from across all year levels were surveyed using 
the Student Survey (Box 12.1) and the following issues were identified as concerns:
• The children in my class call others by unkind names.
• Kids are mean to me in the playground.
• At this school, when children fight or argue the teacher sorts it out fairly .

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
89
12.1 A student survey
I am a girl  ______ I am a boy ______ I am in year ______
Survey statement Most of 
the time
Some of 
the time
None of 
the time
I like being at this school.
My friends help me with my class work 
when I need help.
I help my friends with their work when they 
need help.
My teacher likes to help me with my work.
My teacher lets me know how I am doing 
with my work.
I like to help my teacher when she or he has 
jobs that need doing.
My teacher likes to listen to my ideas.
There is a choice of  activities in my room.
Teachers don’t mind if  I make mistakes as 
long as I try my best.
The children in my class call others by 
unkind names.
Kids are mean to me in the playground.
If  I feel unhappy at school I can talk to my 
teacher or another adult about my problems.

90
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Survey statement I agree Not sure I do not 
agree
At this school, when children fight or argue 
the teacher sorts it out fairly .
We help make the rules of  our classroom.
I feel comfortable with most of  the children 
at this school.
The staff  at this school are friendly to me.
I am learning a lot at this school.
At lunchtimes there are places in the school 
I can go to be comfortable.
The three things I like best about my school are:
The three things I would change about this school are:

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
91
After the survey , the peer support groups discussed significant issues identified in the 
student survey . Peer support leaders facilitated conversations with their multi-age 
groups about each issue and recorded suggestions for improvement. These were 
later considered in a combined peer support group meeting. The collection of  layers 
of  data provided a deep understanding of  issues from a range of  perspectives and 
information gathered provided useful feedback to the school.
The surveys confirmed that all groups felt a high degree of  satisfaction about issues 
such as:
• Everyone is made to and feels welcome.
• Students enjoy being at the school.
• There is a partnership between staff  and parents/carers with opportunities for  
 parents/carers to be involved in school decision-making.
• All local communities are involved in the school and those who volunteer at   
 the school are valued.
• Staff  work hard to help students.
The following were identified as issues to be improved:
• Communication between groups in the school.
• Sharing of  resources between groups.
• Staff  collaboration.
• Staff  planning to meet needs of  all students.
The school principal reported that the Index process assisted in the review of  support 
services to students and provided a focus for professional conversations with staff. An 
inclusion policy was developed addressing key priorities as identified by staff, students, 
and parents. The working party identified that further professional conversations 
needed to occur for staff  to reflect on classroom practices. The implementation plan 
for the new inclusion policy needed to be sensitive to staff  feelings and perceptions, as 
well as facilitating professional development. The staff, in particular, required a sup-
portive, participatory process that would lead them to question the taken-for-granted 
assumptions linked to culture, policy , and practice in the school community . Ensuring 
the process was owned and driven from within the school increased sustainability . 
Staff, students, parents, and administration need to be actively involved in a successful 
school development process. The Index for Inclusion did not provide a solution; it gave 
insiders permission to think differently , to take away the usual restraints, and to look 
at all possibilities for moving forward.
Cotton Tree Secondary School
Cotton Tree Secondary School has about 500 students from a diversity of  back-
grounds. The school has a special education unity supporting 33 students who have 
a range of  disabilities, including intellectual disability , Autism Spectrum Disorder, 
physical impairment, and speech language impairment. Aboriginals and Torres Strait 
islanders comprise 3.5% of  the student population and 3.4% of  families indicate that 
they speak a language other than English in their home (e.g., Filipino, Portuguese, 
Russian, Spanish, and Indian). The principal was keen to involve students in a pro-
cess of  review and future planning for the school. She believed that student views 

92
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
frequently are lost in the business of  school improvement and noted that they are 
rarely thought of  as active participants in school review processes.
A Student Management Team, consisting of  approximately 35 students from Years 9 
to 12, had been involved in decision-making about school matters such as uniforms 
and school special events. The principal was keen to extend opportunities for this 
group of  students to be more involved in developing and refining school policies and 
procedures. In general, the students represented the diversity in the student popula-
tion. The Student Management Team met with teachers from the school to discuss 
student response to a number of  statements:
• In most lessons, students and teachers behave well toward each other.
• Opinions of  students are sought about how the school might be improved.
• Students are confident that their difficulties with be dealt with effectively .
• Students share responsibility for helping to overcome the difficulties experience  
 by some students in lessons.
• When you first joined this school you were helped to feel settled.
• Students worry about being bullied at this school.
• Students are taught to appreciate people who have different backgrounds to   
 their own.
• Teachers try to help all students do their best.
• At lunchtime, there are places in the school where students can go to be comfortable.
• When students have problems with their work they ask the teacher for help.
The 10 statements were drawn from the culture, policy , and practice dimensions of  the 
Index for Inclusion. The students were asked to discuss each statement and record an 
answer: “Yes, we agree”; “We are not sure”; or “No, we do not agree” on a recording 
chart for each statement posted on a wall. Students could also make any comments 
from their discussion on sticky notes posted on the recording charts. Once the informa-
tion was collated, students were asked to consider future actions (see Box 12.2).
Representatives from the Student Management Team presented the issues and the 
range of  actions to a school committee (school principal, teaching staff  representatives, 
students, and members of  the school community , including parents of  students attend-
ing the school). Staff  and parents were impressed with the insights and actions proposed 
by the students. For example, the Student Management Team suggested a number of  
student-driven ways to welcome new students: the office could liaise with the Student 
Team in the organization of  a welcome committee and peer buddy system, and provide 
information about processes and policies at the school. The school principal, teachers, 
and parents were supportive of  the recommended actions.

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
93
12.2. Student management team forum, data and planning
Statements Strength/
Concern Action
In most lessons, students and 
teachers behave well toward 
each other.
Concern We need to learn to interact with 
each other.
Reinforce teacher-student relationship.
Revisit code of  behaviour (Student 
Management Team to review and 
rewrite).
Opinions of  students are 
sought about how the school 
might be improved.
Concern Representatives to go to Teacher 
Management Meeting to make sure 
the right information is getting told.
Participate in a range of  meetings – 
Parents and Citizens and Triennial 
School Review .
Students are confident that their 
difficulties will be dealt with 
effectively . 
Concern Students should be made aware of 
their options, where they can go 
for help.
Set time in class for students to raise 
concerns.
Students share responsibility 
for helping to overcome the 
difficulties experienced by some 
students in lessons.
Strength No action needed here.
When you first joined this school 
you were helped to feel settled.
Concern Extend workshop and camps to 
form stronger support groups and 
friendships.
Older grades have friendship-building 
activities.
Students volunteer to help new 
students.
A book of  hints made by Student 
Management Team to give to stu-
dents in Year 7 (e.g., have informa-
tion on peer mediation process).
Students worry about being 
bullied at this school.
Concern Continue peer mediation, raise 
awareness about what they do – 
needs publicity about this.
Give students information book in 
Year 8.
Focus on teaching about bullying in 
Years 8 and 9.
Acknowledge the issues – bullying still 
exists in upper school but it is subtle.

94
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Statements Strength/
Concern Action
Students are taught to appreci-
ate people who have different 
backgrounds to their own. 
Concern 
and 
Strength
Treat everyone as equals – needs to 
be more embedded in teaching. 
School expectation is a strength and 
needs to continue.
Teachers try to help all students 
do their best.
Strength 
and 
Concern
Included in Action for Statement 1.
At lunchtime there are places in 
the school where students can 
go to be comfortable.
Concern More seating (all year levels).
Year 12s need a place to eat lunch so 
younger grades do not feel intimi-
dated near the tuck shop.
When students have problems 
with their work they ask the 
teacher for help.
Strength 
and 
Concern
Most teachers do their best to help.
Students tease other students for 
asking questions.
Sometimes students are embarrassed 
to ask questions.
This needs to be addressed.
Empowering the students to contribute to school review and planning helped the devel-
opment of  pride in showcasing the school to future students and the community . One 
student said, “It’s just an awesome achievement for us to be able to be involved.” The 
process demonstrates how students can raise awareness of  issues of  importance to them 
and provide feedback on positive school cultural characteristics that lead to a higher level of  
respect for students and their view about the environment and culture of  the school.
The teaching and learning context
Before progressing with a discussion about how home, school, and community 
relationships can be developed, it is important to consider the key assumptions that 
underlie inclusive education that influence the development of  these relationships. In 
Australia, our understandings about inclusive education have evolved from the notion 
of  integrating students with disabilities into regular schools. Currently , the terms 
integration and inclusion are still confused.
With integrating, there is a focus on helping students with disabilities to fit in to the 
regular classroom. This focus emphasizes teaching the normal curriculum with teach-
ers considering what modifications may be needed to meet the needs of  students who 
have a disability . Therefore, integration neither necessarily challenges the organisation 
and provision of  curriculum for students nor considers the development of  respectful 
relationships among students, parents, and the community . There is little recogni-
tion of  the social and cultural differences that exist in the range of  communities. In 
contrast, an inclusive approach to schooling focuses on diversity and difference in our 
society . For schools to cater for diverse populations of  students, questions are raised 
about personal assumptions and beliefs that inform views about schools, teachers, 
students, teaching and learning, and the interconnectedness between individuals, 
education, and society . In an inclusive approach, teachers listen to their students and 
their families and build a curriculum that is appropriate and respectful for those needs.

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
95
A preservice teacher recently commented to me: 
I realized that inclusion begins with everyday actions – the way you treat people and 
the language you use to talk about different groups of  people can reinforce or tear 
down inclusion and acceptance … An inclusive society can only be created when 
people look beyond another person’s skin colour, religion, sex, or social status to see a 
real person who deserves respect and the same chances in life as anyone else.
In formal terms, schools are now being asked to move away from a deficit model 
where a problem, such as a learning difficulty , is essentially located within the indi-
vidual, to a social model that recognizes that difference can be created through social 
institutions that have oppressive, discriminatory , and disabling practices.
In the past, if  students had problems with learning or had a disability , the students were 
usually removed from the regular classroom and identified and labelled in some way . 
Remedial programs and special interventions were designed to fix their problem. Some 
students with disabilities were not included in regular school programs. Inclusive educa-
tion strives to achieve a way of  life in schools where people are valued and treated with 
respect for their varied knowledge and experiences. Inclusive education demands that 
schools listen to the needs of  the students and parents/carers to inform the planning of  
flexible curriculum and pedagogy that is learner-focused, rather than content-driven. 
This inclusive way of  thinking means that teachers consider the social and cultural 
backgrounds of  the families and students when planning their classroom programs. It is 
the responsibility to meet the needs of  the students in their classroom.
Issues and challenges
Working in school communities
If  teachers are to embrace the strengths and needs of  students and parents in their 
school community , they need to invest time and energy to listen to students and 
understand the diverse backgrounds from which they come. Working with students 
who have a disability or who come from different cultural backgrounds can be 
daunting for teachers. Many teachers have not had a broad experience with a range 
of  people in society . Teachers working in some areas need to work with a number of  
government agencies that provide support services to families who are disadvantaged. 
As a teacher, you can recognize that every individual, family , or community member 
can contribute to your learning and understanding to achieve a successful school 
program. Education departments, governments, and community organizations have a 
variety of  support services and specialists to assist teachers to support the diversity of  
student needs. 
Developing sustainable school communities
Many school communities have made good progress in developing an inclusive cul-
ture, inclusive policies, and inclusive practices. Progress can be driven by key person-
nel in the school such as a school principal. Yet, with a change of  leadership, priorities 
can be altered and a school might slip back into authoritarian and traditional ways of  
work. If  the value of  working in inclusive ways is not embedded in the work practices 
of  the people in the school, then a new school principal can direct the focus to other 

96
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
priorities that may not value and support all students and families. To avoid their lack 
of  sustainability of  inclusive school development, school principals and school leaders 
need to develop democratic and shared leadership that encourages a commitment to 
shared goals. “Beige teachers” cannot achieve inclusive schools.
The concept of  beige teachers was presented by Linda Graham in her doctoral studies 
where she drew on the ideas of  the Scottish comedian “Billy Connolly , who wages a 
self-confessed war against the ‘beige army’ – all those who wear beige, are beige and 
seek to make others beige as well” (Graham, 2006, p. 198). In contrast, beginning 
teachers need to be passionate and creative about engaging with the broader commu-
nity in democratic ways, where difference and diversity are valued, and the problem 
of  injustice and exclusion in education can be addressed and shared. Enthusiastic 
teachers who are committed to achieving inclusive schooling can become active 
participants and drivers of  school change. A strong inclusive school culture can be 
achieved and sustained when students, parents, teachers, and the school administra-
tion work at various levels to achieve common goals. Later in this chapter you will be 
asked to consider how you could plan for sustainable change in a school community .
Inclusive schooling versus standards agenda
There is tension between an inclusive approach in schools and the focus on raising 
standards. It is evident that there are many non-inclusive aspects of  the current national 
focus on testing, raising standards, and the education department resourcing models 
based on categories of  disability and difference. The range of  ever-changing external 
policy agendas create pressures within schools to lift standards and this may create 
negative views about some children and some family backgrounds, and lead to exclusion 
of  students. In a positive way , these external agendas can also prompt school leaders to 
consider students who are not achieving well and prompt problem-solving for students’ 
outcomes. Therefore, the focus on standards can be interpreted in several ways at the 
school level, each being informed by the school culture and priorities.
Pressure in some schools to cover the set curriculum may not allow teachers to 
differentiate instruction depending upon students’ abilities because of  the need to 
teach a sequence of  curriculum content in a specified period of  time. This situation 
is a common problem for secondary school teachers. A focus on covering the content 
combined with pressure about raising standards usually means that teachers are 
rarely able to address the needs of  individual students in the classroom. Teachers may 
perceive that the structure of  the curriculum and associated high academic expecta-
tions are barriers to the development of  an inclusive approach to teaching. Where 
withdrawal (or pull out) programs exist for students who are experiencing learning 
difficulties, the responsibility for the student shifts to someone outside of  the regular 
classroom. In schools with a culture of  high achievement expectations, students who 
have difficulties with learning the standard curriculum were thought to “weigh down” 
the regular students. This type of  thinking implies that students have a deficit because 
they are not meeting the demands of  the curriculum.
A close focus on academic achievement and traditional teaching practices provides 
few opportunities for teaching staff, special educators, and school administrators to 
meet, reflect, and discuss key issues about meeting the needs of  students, especially 
those who are in secondary schools. In such schools, staff  operate from within the 

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
97
perspective of  an existing structure and this makes it difficult to think about an alter-
native school organisation and teaching of  the curriculum.
Inclusion is more than placement
Inclusive education is about much more than the location where learning takes place. A 
student who has a disability may be sitting in a Year 5 or a Year 9 classroom but may be 
ostracised by their peers and may not have their learning needs met by the teacher.
Even when special assistance is available, it may not mean that the student is truly 
included in the regular class. For example, in one secondary school, in-class support 
was provided for students who have learning difficulties. The support was provided 
by regular class teachers who were not engaged in a class for that period. This idea 
seems innovative but after observing the initiative in practice and discussing the 
process with staff, it became clear that this practice was not inclusive. In a science 
class, for example, a supporting class teacher was timetabled to assist three students 
with learning difficulties. These students were seated at the back of  the class and 
worked on a science task with the supporting class teacher. The regular class teacher 
did not include the three students when she was teaching the regular lesson to the 
reminder of  the class. The students with difficulties were still very much segregated 
from the class because the class teacher was not encouraged to modify her teaching 
or the curriculum to cater for the individual differences. Some teachers want to carry 
on with their regular teaching for the “normal” students with as little disruption as 
possible to their usual routines and do not take responsibility for all learners in their 
classroom. Leadership and cultural change, as identified earlier, can assist teachers to 
be more inclusive in their classroom practice.
Support to develop inclusive practices
Teachers need in-school support when planning and differentiating instruction and for 
motivating and monitoring learning in the classroom. There must be recognition of  
the time needed for teachers to collaborate and work with teams that include teach-
ers, specialists, and parents. The principal and school leaders can assist by providing 
teachers with formalized release time for these activities if  inclusive education is a 
priority in the school. Professional development is necessary to ensure that teachers 
feel confident in planning and teaching all students in their classroom.
Thus, we can see that the traditional ways in which teachers have been encouraged 
to work need to be critiqued and challenged to facilitate the introduction of  inclu -
sive practices into classroom practice. As beginning teachers you can actively reflect 
on your teaching and model inclusive ways to interacting with students in your 
classroom. Teachers resisting the trend toward sameness and working actively to 
alter a school culture are important factors for embedding inclusive practices into a 
school community .

98
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
From this section of  this chapter we can see that:
• An inclusive teacher listens to students to develop relevant curriculum that   
 caters for all students;
• Sustainable cultural change in the school is required for teachers to adopt   
 inclusive practices;
• This sort of  change requires leadership from the principal, who can model   
 inclusive values to staff;
• An inclusive teacher needs to be innovated and work collaboratively to solve   
 teaching and learning problems;
• Standardised testing and the pressure to cover a set curriculum are two key   
 factors that sustain a traditional approach to teaching;
• Inclusive education is about the curriculum rather than just the location of    
 students; and
• Leadership and professional development are needed to engender cultural   
 change so that teachers will adopt inclusive culture and practice in their   
 classrooms
T eaching essentials 
This section focuses on principles that teachers can develop to inform an ethical and 
inclusive approach in schools.
Collaboration and team-work
Teachers must work together, share ideas, and plan to achieve agreed missions and 
goals. A class of  students in early childhood, primary , and secondary school usually 
contains a broad range of  student abilities and family backgrounds, so the teacher 
needs support from specialists available inside and outside the school. A support 
network can include members of  the school administration, team teachers, teacher 
aides, parents, community volunteers, and specialist teaching support such as special 
education teachers and counsellors. Additional support from state or regional-based 
advisory teams is usually available. These support networks can assist teachers in 
sharing ideas on creating a flexible curriculum and in addressing students’ individual 
learning and social needs.
The opportunity to discuss programs, assessment practices, resources, and activities 
with supporting personnel ensures the sharing of  good ideas and increases the proba-
bility that solutions are found to difficult problems. Collaboration is essential because 
the invention of  new ideas requires reflective problem-solving that will develop 
inclusive practices. These practices, in turn, ensure that student needs are met within 
the education and wider community . One of  the most effective ways of  achieving 
organisational change and an inclusive school is to provide time and opportunities for 
collaboration and problem-solving between general, special, and other educational 
and community-based staff  (Carrington & Robinson, 2006).

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
99
Many school programs have classroom-based support staff, such as teacher aides 
or teacher assistants. Their employment and deployment are usually managed by 
principals and they are assigned to a variety of  roles. In addition, support teachers, 
special education teachers, English as a Second Language (ESL) teachers, guidance 
officers, and advisory visiting specialists all work collaboratively with teachers to 
provide students with quality learning experiences. Due to the intense nature of 
teaching, a challenge for these teams is to ensure there is adequate time to work 
together. Effective collaboration and teamwork in schools frequently occurs on 
the run. That is, teachers and teacher aides catch up informally to discuss student 
progress or share successes and problems while passing in the school corridors or 
while on playground duty . These ongoing communications can compliment more 
formally arranged meetings.
In some schools there are weekly meetings where student support needs are 
indentified and addressed, and specialist services can then be organised. In the past, 
teachers have identified a lack of  knowledge and skills in meeting the pedagogical 
needs of  diverse student populations, especially for students with disabilities (Forlin, 
Douglas, & Hattie, 1996). There is a need for ongoing commitment to professional 
development and learning from individual teachers, schools, and education systems. 
Collaboration and teamwork provide support for teachers to work and learn together 
to develop more inclusive ways of  working (Barton, 2003; Skrtic, Sailor & Gee, 1996).
In traditional schools, teachers have usually worked in isolation and generally have 
not had the opportunity to observe how their colleagues deal with the challenges 
of  classroom teaching. Because of  this, many teachers have not been exposed to a 
range of  practices, and therefore, have not critically reflected on their own. Staff 
working together to solve problems can provide effective ways of  working with 
students because there is an ongoing evaluation of  teaching styles and strategies 
and the school organisation to inform the development and refinement of  inclusive 
policies and practice (Ainscow , 2007). An example of  this can be found in Box 12.3. 
The combination of  professional knowledge gained from working and learning in 
a team provides a varied and interesting approach to teaching and usually enhances 
the job satisfaction for all involved.

100
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
12.3 An excursion to the zoo
Classroom teachers and special education teachers often work together in inclu-
sive schools. The following story illustrates the benefits for a whole class when 
teachers share their knowledge and skills.
A group of  children in Year 2 were planning a school excursion to the local zoo. 
The Year 2 teacher was particularly worried about how a child who had Autism 
Spectrum Disorder (ASD) was going to cope with the demands of  the excur-
sion. The young boy did not cope well with change from the general classroom 
routine and could become very anxious, which could result in tantrums and 
difficult behaviour. The class teacher discussed her concerns with the special 
education teacher from the Special Education Unit, and the special education 
teacher planned a Social Story for the child. A Social Story is a teaching strategy 
that builds on natural social skills and behaviours based on a concept developed 
by Carol Gray (2000). It is a presented as a short story that describes a situation, 
a concept, or social skills so that the child has improved awareness and under-
standing of  a social experience. It is read with, or by , the child a number of  times. 
Sometimes photographs are used to support the story .
The Special Education Teacher wrote the following Social Story:
Next week on Friday our class is going to the zoo for the day.
My teacher, teacher aides, and some parent helpers will come too.
I will meet my friends at the front of  the school on Friday.
I will have my hat and my backpack with the lunch inside.
My friends and I will walk onto the bus and find a seat.
We can talk quietly in the bus on the way to the zoo.
When we get off  the bus, I will stay with my group.
We will walk together and listen to our group leader when she is talking.
We will see lots of  animals at the zoo. Some animals will smell funny.
All of  the animals are in cages or enclosures and cannot hurt me.
After we have lunch at the zoo, we will come back to the school on the bus.
Once the classroom teacher received the Social Story , she decided to use it with 
the whole Year 2 class. The story was presented in large print on a flip chart and 
the teacher and the class read the story together every day in the week leading 
up to the excursion. The strategy was excellent in preparing all students for the 
excursion so the students knew how they were expected to behave and what they 
would do on the day of  the excursion. The Social Story was developed initially to 
enhance the social skills of  one child but it was used to prepare all students for the 
excursion, and also promoted literacy skills. 

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
101
Critical engagement with inclusive ideals and practices
There are many historical and structural factors that have informed teaching practice, 
but these days teachers are encouraged to work with students in ways that suit the 
local context and community . This change demands a series of  deconstructions and 
reconstructions of  beliefs, knowledge, and language rather than transformation of  
traditional beliefs, knowledge, and practices. This means there is a need to expose and 
dismantle stereotyped views and then consider new ways of  thinking about what is 
possible in schools for certain groups of  students.
A common language develops when teachers learn to work together with a range of  
professionals and community members. When critical engagement with issues occurs 
it can provoke deep reflection on taken-for-granted assumptions about, for example, 
particular groups of  pupils or parents. Language usually reflects preconceptions and 
beliefs about many issues and this is exemplified in Box 12.4. Through critical reflection 
on views and actions, teachers gain an awareness of  their assumptions, beliefs, and how 
these relate to practice (Crebbin, 2004). Through this process, teachers develop coherent 
rationales for their beliefs and classroom practices and may even become more aware of  
appropriate alternatives rather than proceeding on impulse and intuition.
12.4 Teachers’ language 
A teacher’s use of  language can reflect and maintain dominant power relationships. 
Read the following story and consider how this teacher’s language revealed her beliefs.
A specialist teacher who was working in a secondary school to support refugee 
students in the school community stated in exasperation, “These girls! They have 
such limited life experiences!”
The question is, however: Did these girls have limited life experiences or different 
life experiences? The teacher may not have realised that her white middle class 
beliefs about difference and her expectations about schooling were influencing (in 
a destructive sense) her plans for an inclusive approach in the school. This anecdote 
about the specialist teacher may be an example of  someone who is unknowingly 
emphasising the beliefs valued by the dominant group to which she belongs (white 
middle class), while advocating an inclusive approach in her work in schools.
In a discussion of  how to brainstorm for good ideas for essay writing in a second-
ary school English class, a teacher was discussing imagination and stated, “Some 
of  you have it and some of  you don’t. That’s the nicest way of  saying it.” This 
statement would not contribute to the development of  a healthy self-esteem for 
many students in the class. As you might expect, even the brighter students would 
be questioning whether they have it or don’t. Reluctance by students to take a risk 
in the classroom was evident when the teacher asked a question after this com-
ment and only one student raised a hand to answer.
This anecdote demonstrates the way language can communicate the value placed 
on natural ability and inadvertently reinforce the negative view of  a student who 
is not achieving.

102
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Development of an inclusive culture
Traditionally and historically , schools have been hierarchical and based on authoritar-
ian models of  governance that alienate and marginalise rather than respect, care for, 
and include members of  the school community . The culture of  a school organisation 
affects the way in which schools operate and the ways that problems are solved. In 
an organisation there is collective social action that is based on relationships that are 
informed by collective understandings among members that are related to roles. The 
individuals’ perspectives direct their behaviour.
School culture can be influenced by beliefs, values, and knowledge relating to the 
following issues:
• Social justice and equity issues;
• Disability and learning problems;
• Barriers to inclusive schooling;
• The nature of  knowledge;
• Teaching and learning;
• The goals of  education;
• Organisation and management of  student behaviour;
• The nature and delivery of  the curriculum;
• Leadership within the school;
• The needs of  teachers; and
• The needs of  the students
An inclusive school culture assumes that the principal and staff  of  the school will 
accept the responsibility for the progress of  all students. The ways of  organizing a 
classroom and a school, the construction of  the role of  teaching, and the delivery 
of  the curriculum influence the way students are taught. An inclusive approach 
requires an organisational philosophy that is committed to the improvement 
of  strategies, programs, and the use of  available resources. Although a school 
organisation is influenced by social structure, it has properties of  its own and will 
develop in response to its internal dynamic, as the example in Box 12.5 shows.

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
103
12.5 A case of withdrawal
This story is about a school principal of  a large secondary school who indicated in 
an interview that he was supportive of  inclusive schooling. In practice, however, 
he continues to emphasise high achievement and standards for each year level in 
his school. That meant that, if  students were not able to meet the high expecta-
tions, then opportunities were provided for them to complete modified work or 
complete the set work with specialist special education support.
In his school, staff  time and effort were frequently devoted to the development of  
the alternative resources and modified teaching programs that were often taught 
away from the usual teaching program for that year. Students were separated from 
their peers and received a watered-down version of  the curriculum. Teachers in 
these programs viewed the learners in these withdrawal programs differently to 
their age peers. Consequently , the students in withdrawal programs often could not 
meet the requirements of  a traditional content-focused curriculum. By ignoring 
their responsibility to provide active and successful learning experiences of  the 
learners in each class, the teachers continued to reinforce the deficit perception of  
learners who were not responding appropriately to the set curricula.
It is possible for staff  to reconstruct the organisation of  a school to meet the needs of  
the students within it. This requires staff  to:
• Communicate;
• Solve problems;
• Demonstrate respect for each other, their students, and families;
• Develop a shared vision or philosophy that will enable them to move out of  the  
 boundaries of  traditional school organisation and practice;
• Learn about the limitations in current practice; and
• Create new knowledge and skills that are needed to include all students

104
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
The story in Box 12.5 highlights the deep change in thinking that is required to 
facilitate the change toward an inclusive approach in schools. The difficulty comes 
from not looking deeply inside us to question beliefs and practice about teaching 
young people from diverse backgrounds and with diverse abilities. The experience 
of  questioning these unspoken truths can be uncomfortable, but it can also be an 
exciting process as new possibilities and perspectives are considered. The following 
ideas may be useful for teachers who wish to be inclusive:
• Be reflective and critical about what you observe and experience in schools;
• Seek out and use a critical friend;
• Be open to constructive critique and be ready to engage in debate and discussion  
 that might be uncomfortable; and
• Be committed to pursuing an ongoing development and learning
The beliefs and understandings that you uncover can be personal but can also be 
shared views in a social context. Many traditional school routines based on unques-
tioned beliefs and assumptions can support ongoing patterns of  behaviour that block 
progress to a more inclusive approach to schooling. However, it is very complex. 
We have all been immersed in our own experiences of  schooling and built our own 
understandings around those experiences. To move toward inclusive practices, we 
must recognise the impact of  our own beliefs and cultural backgrounds on limitations 
and barriers that exist to inclusive schooling.
Development of inclusive policy
The beliefs held within education organisations generated policies that led to practices. 
These policies also identify a process. Read through School A ’s and School B’s behaviour 
policies in Box 12.6 and think about how each policy may contribute to different practic-
es and expectations. Also, consider the underlying values and ideals for each policy .

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
105
 12.6 School behaviour policies
School A behaviour policy
Students will:
• Attend school regularly , on time, 
ready to learn and participate in 
school activities
• Work hard and comply with 
requests or directions from all staff
• Abide by school rules, meet 
homework and assessment 
requirements
• Be well presented and wear the 
school’s uniform as prescribed
• Behave in a responsible manner 
that does not infringe on others’ 
rights to learn
• Respect the property of  the 
school and others
• Maintain a clean and safe 
environment
Parents will:
• Take an active role in my child’s 
academic and social devel-
opment by attending school 
activities, parent evenings and 
interviews
• Inform the school if  there are 
any problems that may affect 
my child’s ability to learn
• Inform the school of  the reason 
for any absence prior to or 
within 48 hours of  the absence
• Make arrangements to enable my 
child to arrive at school on time
• Treat school staff  with respect 
and tolerance
• Support the authority and 
discipline of  the school
School B behaviour policy
Through the understanding of  student’s 
needs and by giving them some control 
and ownership of  the curriculum and 
learning activities in their classrooms, we 
not only minimize behaviour issues and 
develop important social outcomes but 
also strive to provide the highest quality 
education that makes a positive different 
to the lives of  all young people in our 
school community .
At the core of  our plan is also a focus 
upon the individual student and 
their responsibilities in the learning/
behaviour relationship.
We believe that each individual:
1) Makes choices about how they 
act and treat each other
2) Is responsible for their behaviour 
and the choices they make
3) Should accept the consequences 
of  their actions and understand 
the importance of  making amends
4) Can choose to change their 
behaviour
All members of  the school community 
are expected to conduct themselves in 
a lawful, ethical, safe and responsible 
manner that recognises and respects 
the rights of  others. Four key elements 
underpin the creation of  a positive 
climate across the school community:
• RESPECT: For self, for others 
and natural/built environments
• RESPONSIBILITY: 
Cooperation, courtesy and 
consideration for all
• RIGHTS: Every student has the 
right to learn unhindered
• REPUTATION: Promote and 
enhance the good name of  the 
school

106
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
In reading these behaviour management policies you will note the difference in their 
language. For example, notice the words used in School A ’s behaviour policy and then 
compare this with the language in School B’s behaviour policy . School A has a focus 
on rules and with an expectation of  compliance for both students and parent. School 
B has a focus on a shared responsibility to ensure positive outcomes for all in the 
school community . You can see that behaviour policy A articulates traditional power 
relations, whereas behaviour policy B is empowering for students. Policy B involves 
the school recognising and valuing each student. The School A behaviour policy , 
by contrast, constructs students as a homogenous group. It is alienating rather than 
inviting parental involvement.
Learning about the community and developing partnerships
Here, the focus is on community partnerships that promote active connections, trust, 
mutual understanding, and shared values and behaviours. It is the shared commit-
ment that binds the community and makes cooperative action possible. Some schools 
are adopting values-based planning to achieve whole-school teamwork that involves 
parents and the community in shared decision-making. The key focus is on developing 
a sense of  belonging for all members of  the school community alongside coordinated 
review , planning, and action. This approach was reflected in the case studies earlier in 
the chapter.
Values-based planning involving parents and the community can be used to develop:
• A school’s vision (i.e., a dream about what could be);
• The school’s mission (i.e., the fundamental reason for the school’s existence); and
• Strategic planning processes (How we are going to get there)
This planning requires an understanding of  a the value platform for a school culture 
through developing relationships among staff, between staff  and students, and 
between staff  and parents/community . In particular, as noted above, there is a need 
for respect for the full range of  contributions made by parents and the community in 
contrast to the traditional notions of  parent help or community sponsorship. Schools 
frequently refer to parents as partners in the educative process, but the nature of  the 
involvement of  families is superficial in many schools. Indeed, while it is generally 
accepted that parents play a vital role in children’s education, in some schools, parents 
are seen to be more part of  the problem than part of  the solution. With the structure 
and make-up of  families changing, there is a need for a variety of  ways in which 
parents and carers can contribute in a valuable way to schools.
Teachers can consider ways in which parents and other community members can be 
engaged in and contribute to a school. The important issue is to value a broad range 
of  contributions from parents and provide ongoing opportunities for parent feedback 
and consultation. Here are some suggestions that might help.
• Listen to parents and make them feel welcome in the school.
• Roster teachers to attend and address Parents and Citizen’s meetings.
• Distribute newsletters for parents about key projects and activities in the school.
• Survey parents to gather information and feedback on a range of  topics

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
107
• Invite parents to contribute and comment on special project proposals and   
 school review and planning.
• Invite community members, organisations, and business to address staff  and students.
• Consider the representation of  stakeholders in the school community .
In a school where there is a genuine respect for all family groups, opportunities exist 
for a variety of  contributions that are valued. Irrespective of  socioeconomic status, 
education level, cultural background, or family structure, parents usually want their 
children to do well in school. If  learning is accepted as a social process originating 
in the meaning-based relationship that begins in the home, valuing the full range of  
contributions is not only an obligation but a means of  tapping into a rich resource. 
Listening to parents can lead to meaningful participation in resolving collective 
problems. This connectedness between school and families is a positive factor for 
educational success and further constitutes social capital that facilitates achieving 
goals linked to education reform.
In some school communities, key and valued representatives of  the cultural com-
munity work in partnership with the school principal and teachers. For example, in 
many Indigenous communities, it is important to speak with the Elders. Taking the 
time to visit with and talk (or “yarn with”) the senior and respected members of  a 
community can ensure that key issues are shared and discussed. These conversations 
build respect and understanding and facilitate a shared vision for the children and 
community . More recently , community involvement has moved beyond the token 
support roles influenced by the traditional hierarchies of  power. In some Indigenous 
school communities, for example, Elders and community people work collaboratively 
to enhance student attendance and relevance and connection of  the school curricu-
lum to the local context, with the aim of  increasing student achievement and progres-
sion through the school years (Sarra, 2007). Issues such as language, cultural history , 
community relationships and protocols, and appreciation for the land are embedded 
in the school culture, policy , and practice.
When contemplating the contribution of  families to a school, it is valuable to consider 
an inward and outward perspective to transform a school to a school community . For 
example, inclusive education can be described as inward-directed participation in an 
education system that includes a focus on changing school culture through reconstruct-
ed curriculum and pedagogy . This could mean changing teaching and the curriculum 
to meet the needs of  the learners in the school. However, inclusive education can 
also promote and direct social inclusion in society . This change means that education 
is viewed as a form of  citizenship, rather than learning about citizenship. Through 
being socially connected to people from diverse backgrounds, awareness can be raised 
about power dynamics in our society . Students learn to work and support each other 
and develop awareness that some people in society need more help in some ways than 
others. Students learn to become citizen in a community . This learning may influence 
teachers’ beliefs and values, but could also inform relationships with students and their 
families and a more inclusive approach to pedagogy and curriculum.
Critical friends
The final principle for the development of  more inclusive practices involves the use of  a 
critical friend. For example, most schools have access to an education advisor (Inclusive 

108
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Education) or an equivalent person or specialist from a District office who can become 
involved as a consultant in a school renewal process. Some schools have academic part-
ners from outside the university . A critical friend from outside the school can provide 
focus and guidance and encourage processes that uncover the deeper aspects of  thinking 
needed for reform. The role of  this outsider is to facilitate, observe, and challenge 
interactions between stakeholders. For example, a critical friend can:
• Confront oppressive and exclusionary behaviour and language in a  
 constructive manner;
• Act as an interrogator to challenge school policy and practice
Through such a process, teachers and administrators have time and ongoing support 
to consider new ideas and implement new practices. The stakeholders in a school 
community , with help from a critical friend, might consider how students are grouped 
in classes. It may become apparent, for example, that a group of  children in Year 1 are 
not ready for traditional teaching of  academic literacy and need to spend more time 
on play-based use of  language. Students in a secondary school may be missing too 
many classes due to outside paid work commitments and the school may consider 
staggered timetabling to allow for flexibility in school hours. Examples of  these types 
of  changes can be found in many early childhood, primary , and secondary schools and 
demonstrate how school communities work to address students’ needs.
Learning essentials
How can a teacher develop a classroom culture that has a student focus and treats young 
people as citizens and not as tourists drifting through the classroom with no sense of  
belonging? To answer this question, I draw from Freiberg’s work (1996) where it was 
suggested that classroom-management systems should be built on trust and support.
Freiberg’s model, Consistency Management and Cooperative Discipline, is a research-based, 
classroom-tested program that combines instruction effectiveness (through consistent 
classroom organisation) with student self-discipline developed cooperatively with 
teachers. Students are encouraged to contribute in useful ways to the school community 
so that cooperation, participation, and support are key factors. In this model, there is 
a focus on student roles and responsibilities in the classroom so that students feel that 
they belong to a class. For example, students might perform jobs in the classroom such 
as organise paper and supplies for the classroom computers, ensure work stations are 
stocked with appropriate resources, or even take responsibility for briefing supply or 
relief  teachers about the class and the current unit of  work. Students work with the 
teacher to develop shared expectations for behaviour in the classroom so there is a sense 
of  ownership and pride about the activities and performance of  the class. This type of  
approach prevents or minimizes discipline problems. The underlying assumption is that 
students can be more valued and respected as citizens in a school community and able 
to participate in school review , planning, and action.
To enable this respectful culture in schools, we need to overcome the traditional power 
relationships between teachers and students that create barriers to achieving inclusive 
classrooms. Power relationships and hierarchies in education systems usually reinforce 
authoritarian teacher-student relationships that alienate many students. These tradition-
al power relationships can even lead to student disengagement from school.

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
109
Peer-supported learning can help re-engage students who have lost interest in the educa-
tion process. Here, as students participate in active ways, there is little need for dominating 
strategies. Students might work together to solve problems or work on a group project 
or experiment. With peer-supported learning, students can bring their own knowledge, 
experiences and interests to bear on their learning. Thus, teachers can invite them to be 
co-constructors and co-creators of  their learning experiences rather than students being 
merely passive consumers of  the curriculum (Smyth, 2000) or disengaging from it. The 
altered relationship means those students’ perspectives, cultures, and experiences come 
into the centre of  the curriculum because there is communication between the teacher 
and students. If  the teacher has a better understanding of  the students’ ongoing experience 
in the classroom, they can monitor how students are learning. A pedagogy that gives 
students a sense of  belonging can only enhance classroom relationships and opportunities 
to achieve positive learning outcomes as students have a greater desire to learn. Box 12.7 
provides an example of  how students were involved as citizens in a secondary school com-
munity process for school review and development. The comments illustrate the sense of  
respect for students’ ideas and suggestions in the process.
To create a learner-centred classroom that is informed by the students’ needs and 
background, teachers may provide choice in content focus areas or in assessment 
tasks. Students may be encouraged to choose assessment options that provide the 
best opportunity for them to demonstrate their strengths and learning. Students are 
encouraged to be more involved in constructing the learning process. An inclusive 
program assumes that different students will be doing different activities and learning 
in different ways.
Treating students with respect and involving them more in decision-making about 
their learning provides opportunities for them to take the initiative and develop 
responsibility and commitment to meet goals. Generally , students want to partici-
pate actively in learning at school. Teachers can dismantle some of  the traditional 
hierarchies and relationships that prevent teachers and students working together in 
respectful ways. These strategies are not complex. The tools of  collaboration, team-
work and communication based on the inclusive values of  care and respect that have 
been discussed in this chapter can also inform teaching strategies in the classroom. 
Consideration of  student feedback and involvement in problem-solving can open 
opportunities for more activity-based and peer-supported learning that students find 
more engaging. Teachers are constantly faced with the challenge of  teaching students 
who have a wide variety of  ability levels and come from different backgrounds. In 
order to be inclusive, teachers need to believe that it is their responsibility to cater for 
the needs of  the students in their classroom.
Conceptual support for the principle of  student voice and participation is particularly 
evident in the extensive literature on the middle years of  schooling (Beane 1990; Hill 
& Crevola 1997; Russell, Mackay , & Jane, 2003).

110
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
12.7 The school review
A secondary school community was invite to participate in a school review and 
development process by the principal. This process established collaboration and 
teamwork in a culture where students were treated as citizens and not tourists.
One student explained that when she first began her schooling at Cotton Tree 
State High School, she thought, “You just come to school, you learn, you have a 
great time while you were here and then you go” in the same way that tourists pass 
through a town. The word “involvement” was mentioned a number of  times by 
students and captured the change to becoming citizens in their school community . 
Another student said:
We get involved now . We’re looked at a lot of  stuff  that could be improved in our school. 
It makes us feel like we belong to the school and that we are part of  it, and that we have 
something to say that can get across and be listened to … It makes us feel like that we are, 
like the school principal has told us since we first came, family. And the more she involves us 
in decisions that get made, the more we feel like we are part of  a family.
Thus, as the school leaders involved students as active participants in decision-mak-
ing about their school, the traditional power relationships between teachers and 
students were altered to relationships that were more akin to those of  citizenship.
Further to this, a recent Australian report (Lamb, Walstab, Teese, Vickers, & 
Rumberger, 2004), which includes a review of  international literature relating to fac-
tors in retention and early school learning, highlights the need to examine the student 
perspective on what is valuable in school. Student involvement has been shown to be 
a powerful and effective force for school improvement (Carrington & Holm, 2005; 
Flutter & Rudduck 2004; Levin, 1994; Raymond, 2001; Rudduck & Flutter, 1996; Silva, 
2001; SooHoo, 1993).
By listening to students’ voices and seeing them as active participants in classroom 
learning, teachers can cater to students’ diverse needs and interests better. Thus, we 
have seen that:
• Actively involving students in decision-making about their schools enhances   
 their sense of  belonging
• An inclusive school is one in which traditional power structures have been   
 replaced by those of  citizenship
• Listening to students’ voice enhances classroom teaching because teachers are  
 more aware of  the diverse backgrounds, needs, and interests of  their students

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
111
Using this chapter in schools
After reading this chapter, you should have some practical ideas about how to develop 
inclusive relationships with partners in the community , school, and home. The impor-
tance of  ongoing development of  communication, collaboration, and teamwork 
skills has been stressed and you have read about some cases in schools where people 
have worked together to solve problems. You should have a good understanding of  
the dimensions of  culture, policy , and practice that inform the Index for Inclusion and 
understand how these dimensions influence the development of  inclusive schools. 
The case students at the start of  the chapter and the boxes throughout the chapter 
illustrate how the dimensions overlap and inform each other.
The teacher
When you are in schools as a preservice teacher and as a beginning teacher, it is import-
ant to observe the way staff, students are respected and valued for their strengths. Be 
conscious of  judgmental language and sarcasm that may indicate beliefs and values that 
are not inclusive. Watch what happens in the school office when parents and visitors are 
welcomed or not welcomed into the school. As you become more aware and reflective, 
you will develop your own philosophy about teaching and have clear thoughts on what 
you value in future relationships with teacher colleagues, students, and their parents or 
carers. It is important to realize that you may not be able to change policy and whole-
of-school practice as a beginning teacher, but you can follow your own ideals and values 
in your classroom and model your behaviour for others. Gradually , you may become 
confident to take on leadership roles in the school and influence more inclusive ways of  
working. You will learn to evaluate how school policy may or may not address the needs 
of  all members of  the school community in respectful ways.
Reflection on the observations you make of  practices inside and outside of  classrooms 
will also assist your learning and understanding of  how schools operate. For example, 
as a teacher you will need to question and challenge the ways in which school commu-
nities work when you see that the needs of  students, teachers, and parents are com-
promised. You can use a critical friend such as an education advisor or you might have 
access to an advisor within your education system who could help you to challenge and 
alter traditional practices. Academics can also help, as can specialists from government 
and non-government organisations. It is your responsibility as a teacher to develop the 
knowledge, understanding, and skills to support the students in your classroom.
The students’ environment
A teacher who values and respects students is well placed to develop an inclusive 
classroom. Beginning teachers need to be confident and have clear expectations about 
how people will work together. Consider how you would describe your classroom 
culture and list the key principles that will inform how you operate. By modelling 
and discussing your expectations in the classroom and by inviting input from your 
students, you will develop a shared sense of  ownership that will allow students to 
develop as citizens. Motivation and engagement in learning are improved when 
students have a sense of  belonging and commitment. Consider how you will plan to 
achieve this in your classroom.
A classroom and a school that are welcoming for parents and carers invite commu-
nity participation. Each school community context will be different; therefore it is 

112
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
important for beginning teachers to invest time in getting to know the local people. 
As a teacher, you also need to take the time to get to know your students. Discuss the 
teaching focus areas and establish what students know , and identify what they need 
to know to be successful in the school year. Providing opportunity for class discussion 
and some choice in the class activities will ensure a shared commitment and will help 
you as the teacher get to know your class. Some schools plan to function to enable 
parents to meet with new teachers. The important key to success is to be open and 
respectful of  students and their families and be willing to learn and listen. 
Summary
The inevitable presence of  difference among students means that schools must 
become comfortable about building links to the broader community and valuing 
diversity . The school community should foster respect for different views, collabo-
ration, cooperation, and problem-solving among the various stakeholders: students, 
teachers, and parents. There is also a need to develop partnerships among a range of  
government and non-government agencies.
These partnerships assist schools to meet the needs of  their students, and to ensure 
that all students area valued and treated equitably . Indeed, it is only when traditional 
power relationship between teachers and students are altered that an inclusive school 
culture can be developed and sustained. 
Practical activities
Uni-work
1) View a range of  school prospectus documents from the internet. Critically 
analyse the documents for evidence of  inclusive and exclusive school policies 
taking into consideration the content of  this chapter. Consider the values and 
assumptions that inform the various policies. Whose interests are considered or 
not considered? How is this inclusive or exclusive?
2) Visit the Centre for Studies on Inclusive Education website http://inclusion.
uwe.ac.uk/csie [revised URL: http://www .csie.org.uk/index.shtml] and find 
out how you can use the Index for Inclusion to assist you in the development of  
an inclusive school classroom. Develop your own student survey to focus on 
review and development of  how well your teaching approach meets all stu-
dents’ needs in your classroom.
3) In a group with a number of  your student colleagues, assume that a school 
principal has asked you to generate a long-term goal that the school community 
might develop to achieve a more inclusive approach to schooling. Brainstorm 
the important considerations that might ensure the achievement and sustain-
ability of  the goal. What recommendation would you make to the principal 
that would lead to joint school-community ownership and commitment?

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
113
School-work
Remember that school policies may apply that restrict your ability to complete one or 
more of  the activities suggested below . Before beginning any of  the activities, speak 
to your supervising teacher or a member of  the school administration to confirm that 
you can undertake the activity within existing school guidelines and policies.
1) Observe how teachers, parents, students and members of  the school commu-
nity interact and work together. What are some of  the common workplace 
practices and approaches that you can identify from your observations? What 
are the model beliefs, values, and behaviours that might guide your future 
teaching approach?
2) Take notice of  and critique the language that teachers use in the staff  room to 
describe students and their families. Make a list of  common words and phrases 
that are used for students who are complying with the expectations of  the 
teacher, and the words and phrases that are used for those who are seen as 
“difficult students”. Looking at your list, jot down words or phrases that you 
can substitute for those that have negative connotations that would reflect an 
inclusive teachers’ disposition.
3) This is a tough one. Make a list of  the characteristics of  the school culture that 
you admire and aspire to. Then, make a list of  any resources that are available 
in the school to support the positive school culture. How might the community 
outside of  the school enhance the current school culture? Consider how your 
school can develop into a more inclusive environment than it is now . What 
changes can be sustained easily and which might be harder to sustain? You 
could make a summary of  notes and observations that might inform your 
developing role and character as a teacher.

114
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Suggested reading and resources
Allen, J. (ed.) (2003). Inclusion, participation, and democracy: What is the purpose? 
London: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Booth, T . & Ainscow , M. (2002). The Index for Inclusion. Bristol, England: Centre for 
Studies on Inclusive Education.
Keeffe, M. & Carrington, S. (eds.) (2007). Schools and diversity (2nd ed.). Sydney: 
Pearson Education Australia.
Ruddock, J. & Flutter, J. (2004). How to improve your school. London: Continuum.
References
Ainscow , ‘M. (2007). Taking an Inclusive Turn’. Journal of  Research in Special Education 
Needs, 7, 3-7.
Barton, L. (2003). Inclusive Education And Teacher Education: A Basis of  Hope or a 
Discourse of  Delusion. London: Institute of  Education, University of  London.
Beane, J. (1990). A Middle School Curriculum: From Rhetoric to Reality. Columbus, OH: 
National Middle School Association.
Booth, T . & Ainscow , M. (2002). Index for Inclusion. Developing Learning and Participation 
in Schools. Bristol, UK: Centre for Studies on Inclusive Education.
Carrington, S. & Holm, K. ‘(2005). Students Direct Inclusive School Development: 
A Secondary School Case Study’. The Australasian Journal of  Special Education, 29, 
155-171.
Carrington, S. & Robinson, ‘S. (2006). Inclusive School Community: Why Is It So 
Complex?’ The International Journal of  Inclusive Education, 10, 323-334.
Crebbin, W . (2004). Quality Teaching and Learning: Challenging Orthodoxies. New York: 
Peter Lang Publishing.
Flutter, J & Rudduck, J. (2004). Consulting Pupils: What’s in It for Schools?. London: 
RoutledgeFalmer.
Forlin, C., Douglas, G., & Hattie, J. (1996). ‘Inclusive Practices: How Accepting Are 
Teachers?’ International Journal of  Disability, Development and Education, 43, 119-113.
Freiberg, H.J. (1996). ‘From Tourists to Citizens in the Classroom’. Educational 
Leadership, 54, 32-36.
Graham, ‘L. (2006). Done in by Discourse … or the Problem/s with Labeling’. In 
M. Keefe & S. Carrington (Eds.), Schools and Diversity (pp. 46-64). Sydney: Pearson 
Education Australia.

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
115
Gray , C. (2000). The New Social Story Book: Illustrated Edition. Arlington, TX: Future 
Horizons.
Hill, P . & Crevola, C. ‘(1997). Whole School Design for School Improvement’. In 
V .J. Russell (Ed.), Messages from MYRAD: Improving the Middle Years of  Schooling. 
Melbourne, Vic: Incorporated Association of  Registered Teachers of  Victoria.
Lamb, S., Walstab, A., Teese, R., Vickers, M., & Rumberger, R. (2004). Staying on at 
School: Improving Students Retention in Australia – Summary Report, Queensland. 
Department of  Education and the Arts 
 Ø http://education.qld.gov .au/publication/producation/reports/retention/studen-
tretention.pdf, accessed 16 November 2006.
Levin, B. (1994).’ Educational Reform and the Treatment of  Students in schools’. 
Journal of  Educational Thought, 28, 89-101.
Raymond, L. ‘(2001). Student Involvement in School Improvement: From Date Source 
to Significant Voice’. Forum, 43, 58-61.
Rudduck, J. & Flutter, J. (1996). Consulting Young People in Schools. Cambridge: 
University of  Cambridge, Economic and Social Research Council.
Russell, J., Mackay , T . & Jane, G. (2003). Messages from MYRAD: Improving the Middle 
Years of  Schooling. Melbourne, Vic: Incorporated Association of  Registered Teachers of  
Victoria.
Sarra, C. ‘(2007). Young and Black and Deadly: Strategies for Improving Outcomes 
for Indigenous Students’. In M. O’Keeffe & S. Carrington (Eds.), Schools and Diversity. 
Sydney: Pearson Education Australia.
Skrtic, T .M., Sailor, W ., & Gee, K. (1996).’ Voice, Collaboration, and Inclusion’. 
Remedial and Special Education, 17, 142-157.
Smyth, J. (2000).’ Reclaiming Social Capital Through Critical Teaching’. The 
Elementary School Journal, 100, 491-511.
SooHoo, S. ‘(1993). Students as Partners in Research and Restructuring Schools’. 
Educational Reform, 57, 386-393.
Acknowledgement
Special thanks to Robyn Robinson for her work on the development of  the first case study .

116
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 1, week 1, session 2 Student Teacher Reading
Causes of Deteriorating Standard of 
Education in Balochistan: A Review of 
Jabeen and Malik
The following is an excerpt from ‘Causes of  Deteriorating Standard of  Education 
Balochistan’ by Jabeen and Malik: 
Education is an important factor in economic growth. Many countries invest in 
education as a human resource. In other words, they think that if  people are well 
educated, they can contribute to a growing economy . Areas such as health, wom-
en’s status, and child labour improve when people are educated. The Government 
of  Pakistan has accepted that education is a fundamental human right, but it 
has yet to realize the dream of  education for all. Many women are still illiterate. 
Schools are not reaching many children who need them. In many cases, parents 
do not send their children to school when there is a school nearby . Of  the children 
who do go to school, many drop out. ‘The major reason for slow improvement 
in education sector is low level of  public expenditure on education, which was 
around 2.3 percent of  GNP during 1990s. This is significantly short of  the min-
imum of  four percent for GNP recommended by the UNESCO for developing 
countries ( Jabeen & Malik, 2003, p.89).
Jabeen and Malik (2003) identify several causes of  the deteriorating quality of  educa-
tion in Balochistan: 
1) Quantity and quality of students . They argue that students leave school   
 because they do not know its value. Schools often have poor teachers who   
 have not been trained. Sometimes students are treated harshly . 
2) Lack of trained teachers . When teachers do have the proper training, they do  
 not go to the remote areas of  Balochistan.
3) Curriculum is not related to real life . It does not challenge students to   
 become more creative.
4) Not enough books .
5) Language is usually English or English and Urdu . Private schools may   
 offer better education, but poor families cannot afford to send their children.   
 Government school teachers are often poorly trained or not qualified, having   
been appointed for political reasons.
6) Some private schools do not offer good quality  and charge high fees.
7) Poor facilities . Some buildings are overcrowded and/or in poor condition.
8) Tribal system. Some tribes oppose education, especially education of  women.   
 Or they allow women to be educated, but do not want them to serve the nation  
 (pp. 90–1).
S

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
117
The authors conclude:
From the above discussion it is concluded that the education is the very important 
element for the development of  Balochistan province, but because of  the existing 
problem in education, the province is unable to produce the quality of  education. 
The amount of  money allocated in the budget for education is not sufficient. 
Therefore it should be increased at least 4% to 5%, of  the GOP . The monitoring 
and evaluation of  all the educational programs on annual basis also very many 
essentials for the proper utilization of  the funds (p. 91).
T . Jabeen and N. Malik, ‘Causes of  Deteriorating Standard of  Education in 
Balochistan’, Journal of  Applied Sciences, 3 (2003), 89–91. 

118
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 1, week 1, session 2 Faculty Resource
Quality of Primary Education in Pakistan 
The following is the Executive Summary from a preparatory document for the 
Ministerial Meeting of  the South Asia Education for All Forum 21–23 May 2003. 
Executive Summary
Strengthening the quality of  education has become a global agenda at all educational 
levels and more so at the primary level. The quality of  basic education is important 
not only for preparing individuals for the subsequent educational levels but to equip 
them with the requisite basic life skills. Quality education also ensures increased 
access and equality and it is mainly due to these reasons that various international 
forums and declarations have pledged improvements in quality of  education. National 
commitment towards quality education has become significantly visible since the late 
eighties. From then onwards, the government has experimented a number of  initia-
tives and interventions for improving quality with national and foreign funding.
More than twenty experiences of  quality education improvement from the provinces 
were reviewed. Empirical evidence of  improved quality of  students learning in terms 
of  their enhanced achievement scores was available only in the case of  three projects, 
i.e. Primary Teaching Kit, Supplementary Readers, and Primary Education Project- 
Improved Learning Environment (PEP-ILE). The impact of  other projects was 
evident in the form of  improved classroom teaching learning strategies and motivated 
communities for establishing, managing and improving the schools.
After a careful review and analysis it was found that the experiences with one or more 
of  the following characteristics were the most successful:
1) Interventions reaching directly to the classrooms and students. Examples are   
 the Primary Teaching Kit, Supplementary Readers, and other learning material.
2) Experiences developed with the community and parents’ support. Such   
 strategies proved as catalyst for the development of   the project into a   
 programme owned and managed by the community . Examples are    
 Community Support Process in Balochistan, Sindh and NWFP and Fellowship  
 School Programme in Balochistan and Sindh.
3) Scientifically developed learning materials and teacher guides can change the   
 classroom teaching-learning environment and infuse confidence among   
 teachers. Examples are PEP-ILE and Curriculum Reform Project.
4) Provision of  training facilities near the teachers’’ homes/posting places under   
 decentralized cascade training model are very effective for in-service continuous  
 teacher training. PEP-ILE is a good case.
5) Follow-up, monitoring and support has been very effective to intensify teacher   
 training and to ensure its application in the classrooms. The conclusion is drawn  
 from PEP-ILE and some other experiences not included in the text of  the report.
F

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
119
On the basis of  findings it is considered that the following experiences can be replicat-
ed cost effectively with certain modifications:
1) Teaching Kit: Updated Teaching Kit with provisions of  replacement and   
 necessary teacher training at center school level. The preparation cost per  
 Teaching Kit is Rs. 3000/-.
2) Supplementary Readers: A library of  100 titles with five copies of  each can   
 be established at a cost of  Rs. 4000/- only . Additional cost may be required for  
 providing a cupboard for the readers.
3) Improved Learning Environment (PEP-ILE): A coherent decentralized plan   
 of  continuous teacher training, monitoring and evaluation can be established at  
 the pattern of  PEP-ILE in other provinces.
4) Scientific Preparation of  Textbooks and Teacher Guides: Books should   
 be tested before scale implementation. The programme be linked with teacher  
 training and follow-up in the classrooms.
5) The National Education Assessment System should be developed for the   
 purpose of  monitoring learning achievement and providing feedback on   
 various elements of  the educational system and process.
6) Fellowship School Programme It has special value for remote areas which do  
 not have a school. For four years, the government funds a subsidy of  Rs.2,500  
 per student; and subsequently the school is handed over to the community .
7) School Community Participation: Programmes and formal structures   
 involving community and parents such as PTAs, school councils, village   
 education committees, women village education committees, parent education  
 councils etc. can be established according to the local needs and context.
The full document, Quality of  Primary Education in Pakistan (Islamabad: UNESCO, 
May 2003) is available at: 
 Ø http://unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/APCITY/
UNPAN020045.pdf.

120
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 1, week 2, session 3 Student Teacher Reading
Problems in Universalization of Primary 
Education in Pakistan: A Review of 
Khan (2010)
S. B. Khan, ‘Problems in Universalization of  Primary Education in Pakistan’, Pakistan 
Journal of  Commerce and Social Sciences, 4 (2010), 147–55. (This article is available at:
 Ø http://www .jespk.net/publications/36.pdf ).
In the abstract of  an article on universalization of  education in Pakistan, Khan (2010) writes:
‘Education for all’ is a global slogan and government of  Pakistan is committed to 
achieve the goal of  Universalization of  primary education. For this government is 
establishing new schools in remote areas so that more and more children can get 
access to school. Public-private partnership and collaboration with non-government 
organizations are the steps to attain the level of  Universalization of  primary educa-
tion. Government is trying to make schools attractive for children, and is introducing 
schemes to attract parents as well. There are number of  problems like poverty , igno-
rance, low quality teaching, which affects the government efforts (Khan 2010, p. 147).
The author goes on to remind us that education is the right of  every child. Moreover, 
education contributes to economic development and to the ability to participate as citi-
zens of  the nation and the world. Pakistan has had the goal of  a universal, free education 
for all children, but that goal has yet to be achieved. Kahn cites the UNESCO publication 
‘The Education for All Assessment (2000)’ to illustrate the situation in Pakistan:
Investment in primary education has increased from Rs.9563 million in 1990–91 
to Rs 38674 million in 1998–99. It is a record increase of  304% in a short period of  
9 years. … In spite of  these achievements net enrolment /participation rate could 
not exceed 60% against the Jomtein target of  100% net enrolment by the years 
2000. It shows that around 8 million children of  5–9 age group are never enrolled 
in school and half  (50%) of  those (12 million enrolled) may drop out before 
completing primary education. At this rate total number of  out of  school children 
may reach 14 (8 + 6) million by the year 2002–03 (cited in Khan, 2010, p. 150).
S

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
121
Kahn’s research aimed to shed light on the situation in Pakistan. One hundred pri-
mary school teachers from rural areas of  Bahawalnagar District were given a short 
questionnaire. Half  of  the group were men and half  were women. In concluding the 
study , Khan writes that there are many issues that have kept Pakistan from achieving 
the goal of  universalization: poverty , children needing to help earn money for the 
family , fear of  harsh punishment, and limited resources to educate children beyond 
primary school makes learning a trade preferable: 
Teachers are of  the orated that Cultural values, shortage of  teachers are the rea-
sons of  low enrollment at the primary level, they speaks out that role of  commu-
nity and high level efficiency of  educational are very important for accelerating 
the number of  students in primary . Teachers orate that Evening shifts in schools 
can accommodate those schools who remain busy in some work in the morning 
time (Khan, p. 154).
Kahn does not speculate on how schools and communities can work together to 
help achieve the goal of  universalization. It seems critical that they do so, howev -
er, if  Pakistan’s children are to have the knowledge, skills, and dispositions that 
will equip them to contribute to their own homes, schools, and communities as 
active participants.

122
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 1, week 2, session 3 Student Handout
Problems in Universalization of Primary 
Education
S. B. Khan, ‘Problems in Universalization of  Primary Education in Pakistan’, Pakistan 
Journal of  Commerce and Social Sciences, 4 (2010), 147–55. (This article is available at: 
 Ø http://www .jespk.net/publications/36.pdf ).
In ‘Problems in Universalization of  Primary Education in Pakistan’ (2010), Khan lists 
what he suggests are some of  the problems in trying to achieve universal primary 
education in Pakistan. Many of  these issues have their root cause in poverty or low 
household income. Here are some of  them: 
• Some families are unaware of  the benefits of  education or do not value   
 those benefits.
• The school environment is too strict.
• Families need income that children can earn.
• Families cannot afford education beyond primary school, so they think it is   
 better to get their children involved in a trade.
• Culture and traditions do not support girls’ education.
• There is a shortage of  teachers in primary schools.
Can you think of  similar problems from your own schooling experience? 
S

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
123
Unit 1, week 2  Faculty Reference
Fact Sheet: A Summary of the Rights 
Under the Convention on the Rights of 
the Child
This fact sheet is included for your reference. It emphasizes the rights that support the 
claim that every child is entitled to an education. It can also be downloaded from 
 Ø http://www .unicef.org/crc/files/Rights_overview .pdf.
Article 1 (Definition of the child): The Convention defines a ‘child’ as a person 
below the age of  18, unless the laws of  a particular country set the legal age for adult-
hood younger. The Committee on the Rights of  the Child, the monitoring body for 
the Convention, has encouraged States to review the age of  majority if  it is set below 
18 and to increase the level of  protection for all children under 18.
Article 2 (Non-discrimination): The Convention applies to all children, whatever 
their race, religion or abilities; whatever they think or say , whatever type of  family 
they come from. It doesn’t matter where children live, what language they speak, 
what their parents do, whether they are boys or girls, what their culture is, whether 
they have a disability or whether they are rich or poor. No child should be treated 
unfairly on any basis.
Article 3 (Best interests of the child): The best interests of  children must be the prima-
ry concern in making decisions that may affect them. All adults should do what is best 
for children. When adults make decisions, they should think about how their decisions 
will affect children. This particularly applies to budget, policy and law makers.
Article 4 (Protection of rights):  Governments have a responsibility to take all 
available measures to make sure children’s rights are respected, protected and fulfilled. 
When countries ratify the Convention, they agree to review their laws relating to 
children. This involves assessing their social services, legal, health and educational sys-
tems, as well as levels of  funding for these services. Governments are then obliged to 
take all necessary steps to ensure that the minimum standards set by the Convention 
in these areas are being met. They must help families protect children’s rights and cre-
ate an environment where they can grow and reach their potential. In some instances, 
this may involve changing existing laws or creating new ones. Such legislative changes 
are not imposed, but come about through the same process by which any law is 
created or reformed within a country . Article 41 of  the Convention points out the 
when a country already has higher legal standards than those seen in the Convention, 
the higher standards always prevail.
Article 5 (Parental guidance): Governments should respect the rights and responsi-
bilities of  families to direct and guide their children so that, as they grow , they learn 
to use their rights properly . Helping children to understand their rights does not mean 
pushing them to make choices with consequences that they are too young to handle. 
Article 5 encourages parents to deal with rights issues “in a manner consistent with 
F

124
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
the evolving capacities of  the child”. The Convention does not take responsibility for 
children away from their parents and give more authority to governments. It does 
place on governments the responsibility to protect and assist families in fulfilling their 
essential role as nurturers of  children.
Article 6 (Survival and development): Children have the right to live. Governments 
should ensure that children survive and develop healthily .
Article 7 (Registration, name, nationality , care): All children have the right to a 
legally registered name, officially recognised by the government. Children have the 
right to a nationality (to belong to a country). Children also have the right to know 
and, as far as possible, to be cared for by their parents.
Article 8 (Preservation of identity):  Children have the right to an identity – an offi-
cial record of  who they are. Governments should respect children’s right to a name, a 
nationality and family ties.
Article 9 (Separation from parents): Children have the right to live with their 
parent(s), unless it is bad for them. Children whose parents do not live together have 
the right to stay in contact with both parents, unless this might hurt the child.
Article 10 (Family reunification): Families whose members live in different countries 
should be allowed to move between those countries so that parents and children can 
stay in contact, or get back together as a family .
Article 11 (Kidnapping): Governments should take steps to stop children being taken 
out of  their own country illegally . This article is particularly concerned with parental 
abductions. The Convention’s Optional Protocol on the sale of  children, child prostitu-
tion and child pornography has a provision that concerns abduction for financial gain.
Article 12 (Respect for the views of the child): When adults are making decisions 
that affect children, children have the right to say what they think should happen and 
have their opinions taken into account. This does not mean that children can now tell 
their parents what to do. This Convention encourages adults to listen to the opinions 
of  children and involve them in decision-making -- not give children authority over 
adults. Article 12 does not interfere with parents’ right and responsibility to express 
their views on matters affecting their children. Moreover, the Convention recognizes 
that the level of  a child’s participation in decisions must be appropriate to the child’s 
level of  maturity . Children’s ability to form and express their opinions develops with 
age and most adults will naturally give the views of  teenagers greater weight than 
those of  a preschooler, whether in family , legal or administrative decisions.
Article 12 (Respect for the views of the child): When adults are making decisions 
that affect children, children have the right to say what they think should happen and 
have their opinions taken into account.
Article 13 (Freedom of expression): Children have the right to get and share informa-
tion, as long as the information is not damaging to them or others. In exercising the 
right to freedom of  expression, children have the responsibility to also respect the rights, 

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
125
freedoms and reputations of  others. The freedom of  expression includes the right to 
share information in any way they choose, including by talking, drawing or writing.
Article 14 (Freedom of thought, conscience and religion): Children have the right 
to think and believe what they want and to practise their religion, as long as they are 
not stopping other people from enjoying their rights. Parents should help guide their 
children in these matters. The Convention respects the rights and duties of  parents in 
providing religious and moral guidance to their children. Religious groups around the 
world have expressed support for the Convention, which indicates that it in no way 
prevents parents from bringing their children up within a religious tradition. At the 
same time, the Convention recognizes that as children mature and are able to form their 
own views, some may question certain religious practices or cultural traditions. The 
Convention supports children’s right to examine their beliefs, but it also states that their 
right to express their beliefs implies respect for the rights and freedoms of  others.
Article 15 (Freedom of association):  Children have the right to meet together and to 
join groups and organisations, as long as it does not stop other people from enjoying 
their rights. In exercising their rights, children have the responsibility to respect the 
rights, freedoms and reputations of  others.
Article 16 (Right to privacy): Children have a right to privacy . The law should protect 
them from attacks against their way of  life, their good name, their families and their 
homes.
Article 17 (Access to information; mass media): Children have the right to get 
information that is important to their health and well-being. Governments should 
encourage mass media – radio, television, newspapers and Internet content sources 
– to provide information that children can understand and to not promote materials 
that could harm children. Mass media should particularly be encouraged to supply 
information in languages that minority and indigenous children can understand. 
Children should also have access to children’s books.
Article 18 (Parental responsibilities; state assistance): Both parents share responsi-
bility for bringing up their children, and should always consider what is best for each 
child. Governments must respect the responsibility of  parents for providing appro-
priate guidance to their children – the Convention does not take responsibility for 
children away from their parents and give more authority to governments. It places 
a responsibility on governments to provide support services to parents, especially if  
both parents work outside the home.
Article 19 (Protection from all forms of violence): Children have the right to be pro-
tected from being hurt and mistreated, physically or mentally . Governments should 
ensure that children are properly cared for and protect them from violence, abuse and 
neglect by their parents, or anyone else who looks after them. In terms of  discipline, 
the Convention does not specify what forms of  punishment parents should use. 
However any form of  discipline involving violence is unacceptable. There are ways to 
discipline children that are effective in helping children learn about family and social 
expectations for their behaviour – ones that are non-violent, are appropriate to the 
child’s level of  development and take the best interests of  the child into consideration. 

126
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
In most countries, laws already define what sorts of  punishments are considered 
excessive or abusive. It is up to each government to review these laws in light of  the 
Convention.
Article 20 (Children deprived of family environment): Children who cannot be 
looked after by their own family have a right to special care and must be looked after 
properly , by people who respect their ethnic group, religion, culture and language.
Article 21 (Adoption): Children have the right to care and protection if  they are 
adopted or in foster care. The first concern must be what is best for them. The same 
rules should apply whether they are adopted in the country where they were born, or 
if  they are taken to live in another country .
Article 22 (Refugee children): Children have the right to special protection and help 
if  they are refugees (if  they have been forced to leave their home and live in another 
country), as well as all the rights in this Convention.
Article 23 (Children with disabilities): Children who have any kind of  disability have 
the right to special care and support, as well as all the rights in the Convention, so that 
they can live full and independent lives.
Article 24 (Health and health services): Children have the right to good quality 
health care – the best health care possible – to safe drinking water, nutritious food, a 
clean and safe environment, and information to help them stay healthy . Rich countries 
should help poorer countries achieve this.
Article 25 (Review of treatment in care): Children who are looked after by their 
local authorities, rather than their parents, have the right to have these living arrange-
ments looked at regularly to see if  they are the most appropriate. Their care and 
treatment should always be based on “the best interests of  the child”. (see Guiding 
Principles, Article 3).
Article 26 (Social security): Children – either through their guardians or directly – 
have the right to help from the government if  they are poor or in need.
Article 27 (Adequate standard of living): Children have the right to a standard of  
living that is good enough to meet their physical and mental needs. Governments 
should help families and guardians who cannot afford to provide this, particularly with 
regard to food, clothing and housing.
Article 28: (Right to education): All children have the right to a primary education, 
which should be free. Wealthy countries should help poorer countries achieve this 
right. Discipline in schools should respect children’s dignity . For children to benefit from 
education, schools must be run in an orderly way – without the use of  violence. Any 
form of  school discipline should take into account the child’s human dignity . Therefore, 
governments must ensure that school administrators review their discipline policies 
and eliminate any discipline practices involving physical or mental violence, abuse or 
neglect. The Convention places a high value on education. Young people should be 
encouraged to reach the highest level of  education of  which they are capable.

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
127
Article 29 (Goals of education): Children’s education should develop each child’s 
personality , talents and abilities to the fullest. It should encourage children to respect 
others, human rights and their own and other cultures. It should also help them learn 
to live peacefully , protect the environment and respect other people. Children have a 
particular responsibility to respect the rights their parents, and education should aim 
to develop respect for the values and culture of  their parents. The Convention does 
not address such issues as school uniforms, dress codes, the singing of  the national 
anthem or prayer in schools. It is up to governments and school officials in each 
country to determine whether, in the context of  their society and existing laws, such 
matters infringe upon other rights protected by the Convention.
Article 30 (Children of minorities/indigenous groups): Minority or indigenous 
children have the right to learn about and practice their own culture, language and 
religion. The right to practice one’s own culture, language and religion applies to 
everyone; the Convention here highlights this right in instances where the practices 
are not shared by the majority of  people in the country .
Article 31 (Leisure, play and culture): Children have the right to relax and play , and 
to join in a wide range of  cultural, artistic and other recreational activities.
Article 32 (Child labour): The government should protect children from work that is 
dangerous or might harm their health or their education. While the Convention pro-
tects children from harmful and exploitative work, there is nothing in it that prohibits 
parents from expecting their children to help out at home in ways that are safe and 
appropriate to their age. If  children help out in a family farm or business, the tasks 
they do be safe and suited to their level of  development and comply with national 
labour laws. Children’s work should not jeopardize any of  their other rights, including 
the right to education, or the right to relaxation and play .
Article 33 (Drug abuse): Governments should use all means possible to protect 
children from the use of  harmful drugs and from being used in the drug trade.
Article 34 (Sexual exploitation): Governments should protect children from all forms 
of  sexual exploitation and abuse. This provision in the Convention is augmented by the 
Optional Protocol on the sale of  children, child prostitution and child pornography .
Article 35 (Abduction, sale and trafficking): The government should take all mea-
sures possible to make sure that children are not abducted, sold or trafficked. This 
provision in the Convention is augmented by the Optional Protocol on the sale of  
children, child prostitution and child pornography .
Article 36 (Other forms of exploitation):  Children should be protected from any 
activity that takes advantage of  them or could harm their welfare and development.

128
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Article 37 (Detention and punishment): No one is allowed to punish children in a 
cruel or harmful way . Children who break the law should not be treated cruelly . They 
should not be put in prison with adults, should be able to keep in contact with their 
families, and should not be sentenced to death or life imprisonment without possibili-
ty of  release.
Article 38 (War and armed conflicts): Governments must do everything they can to 
protect and care for children affected by war. Children under 15 should not be forced 
or recruited to take part in a war or join the armed forces. The Convention’s Optional 
Protocol on the involvement of  children in armed conflict further develops this right, 
raising the age for direct participation in armed conflict to 18 and establishing a ban 
on compulsory recruitment for children under 18.
Article 39 (Rehabilitation of child victims): Children who have been neglected, 
abused or exploited should receive special help to physically and psychologically 
recover and reintegrate into society . Particular attention should be paid to restoring 
the health, self-respect and dignity of  the child.
Article 40 ( Juvenile justice): Children who are accused of  breaking the law have 
the right to legal help and fair treatment in a justice system that respects their rights. 
Governments are required to set a minimum age below which children cannot be held 
criminally responsible and to provide minimum guarantees for the fairness and quick 
resolution of  judicial or alternative proceedings.
Article 41 (Respect for superior national standards): If  the laws of  a country pro-
vide better protection of  children’s rights than the articles in this Convention, those 
laws should apply .
Article 42 (Knowledge of rights): Governments should make the Convention known 
to adults and children. Adults should help children learn about their rights, too. (See 
also Article 4.)
Articles 43–54 (implementation measures): These articles discuss how governments 
and international organizations like UNICEF should work to ensure children are 
protected in their rights.

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
129
Unit 2, week 3, session 5 Student Teacher Reading
Socialization and Child Development
One of  the great, historic debates among psychologists who study children is nature 
versus nurture, a debate you may have discussed in your study of  child development. 
Most psychologists agree that both are important. It is clear that there are some things 
we inherit from our parents such as physical characteristics, talents, and skills. But it is 
equally clear that we are deeply influenced by how we are reared. 
Many of  the characteristics that define us as individuals are the result of  the envi-
ronment in which we are born and raised. We are socialized to have a particular 
language, certain beliefs, values, ways of  acting, and food preferences. Even the games 
and sports that we enjoy are influenced by socialization. From the moment we are 
born, our parents, brothers and sisters, extended family , and even our community are 
all shaping us. Our parents have a particular status in the community . Their status 
influences how others see us and how we see ourselves. 
We may have been born into a family where there is plenty . Or we may have been born 
into a family that had to work hard just to make sure there was sufficient food to eat. 
We may have been born in a rural village or a big city – and as such, our surroundings 
would contribute significantly to how we understand the world. We may have been 
born into a family with strong religious beliefs, and those religious beliefs and practices 
shape us. We may have been born into a family that enjoys reading or a family where 
people do not read. This too influences who we are. (Research has demonstrated that 
children who are born into families where parents are educated and read to them, are 
more likely to do well in school and go on to higher education.) 
We are influenced by popular culture, too. Advertising through media manipulates 
us to want things we have seen advertised, even though we may not need them! The 
music we listen to, the books we read, the television we watch, and the movies we see 
all influence us. If  our family spends time watching television, we have been shaped 
by television in some way . Social media influences us. For example, some researchers 
think that our language is becoming limited by text messaging and that, over time, 
this will affect the range of  words we use for self-expression – another example of  
social influence on development. 
School helps to shape us too. Teachers, other children, and the opportunities we have 
at school help us to develop in certain ways. Not only are we taught knowledge, skills, 
and values in school, but we take on a particular social status because of  the school 
we attend. Graduates of  a highly ranked private school may have access to more 
opportunities than graduates of  a public village school, for example. 
S

130
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
As teachers, we need to understand how socialization influences learning. Children 
have knowledge of  the world based on their experiences. What they already know 
and believe influences their ability to learn in school. For example, when we look at 
the faces of  seven-year-olds in our classroom, we see clearly that they do not all look 
the same. But sometimes we are tempted to treat them as if  they were the same in 
experience and capability . They may come from the same community . They may 
be the same age. But it is important to remember that they are not the same. Their 
experiences of  socialization will be different. The funds of  knowledge that they have 
will not be equal. Their attitudes towards you as teacher, towards the other children, 
and towards school will be different. 
Today , schools recognize that they need to work with parents and communities 
in order to provide the best education for children. School staff  understands that 
they have a strong socializing influence on children, too. They know that they may 
be working against what children have learned at home and in the community . 
Socialization of  children to be successful in school will be more powerful and positive 
if  it is done with parents and with the community . When schools, teachers, parents, 
and communities work together, everybody benefits. 

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
131
Unit 2, week 3, session 6 Faculty Resource
This paper could be the basis of  a series of  lectures, or key paragraphs could be used 
for to introduce a discussion of  social interaction through a readers theatre activity . 
You will notice that there is also a discussion of  media and communication that may 
be useful in later sessions where the role of  media in society is a topic of  discussion. 
Note that several dates are missing in the document. This is as per the original docu-
ment which is in draft. The document can also be downloaded at 
 Ø http://davis.foulger.info/research/unifiedModelOfCommunication.htm. 
Used by permission of  the author. For educational use only .
Models of the Communication Process
Davis Foulger
Research Consultant, Evolutionary Media1 
Adjunct Associate Professor, Brooklyn College/CUNY
Draft: 25 February 2004
Abstract
We teach the same models of  communication today that we taught forty years ago. 
This can and should be regarded as a mark of  the enduring value of  these models 
in highlighting key elements of  that process for students who are taking the process 
apart for the first time. It remains, however, that the field of  communication has 
evolved considerably since the 1960’s, and it may be appropriate to update our models 
to account for that evolution. This paper presents the classic communication models 
that are taught in introducing students to interpersonal communication and mass 
communication, including Shannon’s information theory model (the active model), 
a cybernetic model that includes feedback (the interactive model, an intermediary 
model (sometimes referred to as a gatekeeper model of  the two-step flow), and the 
transactive model. It then introduces a new ecological model of  communication that, 
it is hoped, more closely maps to the the range of  materials we teach and research in 
the field of  communication today . This model attempts to capture the fundamental 
interaction of  language, medium, and message that enables communication, the 
socially constructed aspects of  each element, and the relationship of  creators and 
consumers of  messages both to these elements and each other.
Introduction
While the field of  communication has changed considerably over the last thirty 
years, the models used in the introductory chapters of  communication textbooks 
(see Adler, 1991; Adler, Rosenfeld, and Towne, 1996; Barker and Barker, 1993; Becker 
and Roberts, 1992; Bittner, 1996; Burgoon, Hunsaker, and Dawson, 1994; DeFleur, 
Kearney , and Plax, 1993; DeVito, 1994; Gibson and Hanna, 1992; Wood, 2002) are the 
same models that were used forty years ago. This is, in some sense, a testament to 
their enduring value. Shannon’s (1948) model of  the communication process (Figure 
1) provides, in its breakdown of  the flow of  a message from source to destination, an 
excellent breakdown of  the elements of  the communication process that can be very 
helpful to students who are thinking about how they communicate with others. It 
1 An earlier version of this paper was 
written, published on the web, and used 
in teaching classes in Interpersonal 
Communication, while the author was 
a visiting professor at Oswego State 
University/SUNY Oswego. It has sub -
sequently evolved into one of the most 
viewed papers on my web sites, and 
is routinely viewed many hundreds of 
times a month.
F

132
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
remains, however, that these texts generally treat these models as little more than a 
baseline. They rapidly segue into other subjects that seem more directly relevant to 
our everyday experience of  communication. In interpersonal communication texts 
these subjects typically include the social construction of  the self, perception of  self  
and other, language, nonverbal communication, listening, conflict management, 
intercultural communication, relational communication, and various communication 
contexts, including work and family . In mass communication texts these subjects typ-
ically include media literacy , media and culture, new media, media industries, media 
audiences, advertising, public relations, media effects, regulation, and media ethics. 
There was a time when our communication models provided a useful graphical 
outline of  a semester’s material. This is no longer the case. This paper presents 
the classic models that we use in teaching communication, including Shannon’s 
information theory model (the active model), a cybernetic model that includes 
feedback (the interactive model, an intermediary model (sometimes referred to as a 
gatekeeper model of  the two-step flow), and the transactive model. Few textbooks 
cover all of  these models together. Mass Communication texts typically segue from 
Shannon’s model to a two-step flow or gatekeeper model. Interpersonal texts typi -
cally present Shannon’s model as the “active” model of  the communication process 
and then elaborate it with interactive (cybernetic) and transactive models. Here we 
will argue the value of  update these models to better account for the way we teach 
these diverse subject matters, and present a unifying model of  the communication 
process that will be described as an ecological model of  the communication pro -
cess. This model seeks to better represent the structure and key constituents of  the 
communication process as we teach it today .
Shannon’s Model of the Communication Process
Shannon’s (1948) model of  the communication process is, in important ways, the 
beginning of  the modern field. It provided, for the first time, a general model of 
the communication process that could be treated as the common ground of  such 
diverse disciplines as journalism, rhetoric, linguistics, and speech and hearing scienc -
es. Part of  its success is due to its structuralist reduction of  communication to a set 
of  basic constituents that not only explain how communication happens, but why 
communication sometimes fails. Good timing played a role as well. The world was 
barely thirty years into the age of  mass radio, had arguably fought a world war in its 
wake, and an even more powerful, television, was about to assert itself. It was time 
to create the field of  communication as a unified discipline, and Shannon’s model 
was as good an excuse as any . The model’s enduring value is readily evident in 
introductory textbooks. It remains one of  the first things most students learn about 
communication when they take an introductory communication class. Indeed, it is 
one of  only a handful of  theoretical statements about the communication process 
that can be found in introductory textbooks in both mass communication and 
interpersonal communication. 

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
133
INFORMATION
SOURCE
TRANSMITTER RECEIVER DESTINATION
MESSAGEM ESSAGE
NOISE
SOURCE
SIGNAL RECEIVED
SIGNAL
Figure 1: Shannon’s (1948) Model of  the communication process.
Shannon’s model, as shown in Figure 1, breaks the process of  communication down 
into eight discrete components: 
1) An information source. Presumably a person who creates a message.
2) The message, which is both sent by the information source and received by  
 the destination.
3) A transmitter. For Shannon’s immediate purpose a telephone instrument that 
captures an audio signal, converts it into an electronic signal, and amplifies 
it for transmission through the telephone network. Transmission is readily 
generalized within Shannon’s information theory to encompass a wide range 
of  transmitters. The simplest transmission system, that associated with face-
to-face communication, has at least two layers of  transmission. The first, the 
mouth (sound) and body (gesture), create and modulate a signal. The second 
layer, which might also be described as a channel, is built of  the air (sound) and 
light (gesture) that enable the transmission of  those signals from one person 
to another. A television broadcast would obviously include many more layers, 
with the addition of  cameras and microphones, editing and filtering systems, 
a national signal distribution network (often satellite), and a local radio wave 
broadcast antenna.
4) The signal, which flows through a channel. There may be multiple parallel 
signals, as is the case in face-to-face interaction where sound and gesture 
involve different signal systems that depend on different channels and modes of  
transmission. There may be multiple serial signals, with sound and/or gesture 
turned into electronic signals, radio waves, or words and pictures in a book.
5) A carrier or channel, which is represented by the small unlabeled box in the 
middle of  the model. The most commonly used channels include air, light, 
electricity , radio waves, paper, and postal systems. Note that there may be mul-
tiple channels associated with the multiple layers of  transmission, as described 
above. 
6) Noise, in the form of  secondary signals that obscure or confuse the signal 
carried. Given Shannon’s focus on telephone transmission, carriers, and recep-
tion, it should not be surprising that noise is restricted to noise that obscures 
or obliterates some portion of  the signal within the channel. This is a fairly 
restrictive notion of  noise, by current standards, and a somewhat misleading 
one. Today we have at least some media which are so noise free that com-
pressed signals are constructed with an absolutely minimal amount information 

134
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
and little likelihood of  signal loss. In the process, Shannon’s solution to noise, 
redundancy , has been largely replaced by a minimally redundant solution: error 
detection and correction. Today we use noise more as a metaphor for problems 
associated with effective listening.
7) A receiver. In Shannon’s conception, the receiving telephone instrument. In 
face to face communication a set of  ears (sound) and eyes (gesture). In televi-
sion, several layers of  receiver, including an antenna and a television set.
8) A destination. Presumably a person who consumes and processes the message. 
Like all models, this is a minimalist abstraction of  the reality it attempts to reproduce. 
The reality of  most communication systems is more complex. Most information 
sources (and destinations) act as both sources and destinations. Transmitters, receiv-
ers, channels, signals, and even messages are often layered both serially and in parallel 
such that there are multiple signals transmitted and received, even when they are 
converged into a common signal stream and a common channel. Many other elabora-
tions can be readily described.. It remains, however, that Shannon’s model is a useful 
abstraction that identifies the most important components of  communication and 
their general relationship to one another. That value is evident in its similarity to real 
world pictures of  the designs of  new communication systems, including Bell’s original 
sketches of  the telephone, as seen in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Bell’s drawing of  the workings of  a telephone, from his original sketches (source: Bell 
Family Papers; Library of  Congress; 
 Ø http://memory .loc.gov/mss/mcc/004/0001.jpg)
Bell’s sketch visibly contains an information source and destination, transmitters 
and receivers, a channel, a signal, and an implied message (the information source is 
talking). What is new , in Shannon’s model (aside from the concept of  noise, which 
is only partially reproduced by Bell’s batteries), is a formal vocabulary that is now 
generally used in describing such designs, a vocabulary that sets up both Shannon’s 
mathematical theory of  information and a large amount of  subsequent communica-
tion theory . This correspondence between Bell’s sketch and Shannon’s model is rarely 
remarked (see Hopper, 1992 for one instance). 

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
135
Shannon’s model isn’t really a model of  communication, however. It is, instead, a model 
of  the flow of  information through a medium, and an incomplete and biased model 
that is far more applicable to the system it maps, a telephone or telegraph, than it is to 
most other media. It suggests, for instance, a “push” model in which sources of  infor-
mation can inflict it on destinations. In the real world of  media, destinations are more 
typically self-selecting “consumers” of  information who have the ability to select the 
messages they are most interested in, turn off  messages that don’t interest them, focus 
on one message in preference to other in message rich environments, and can choose 
to simply not pay attention. Shannon’s model depicts transmission from a transmitter 
to a receiver as the primary activity of  a medium. In the real world of  media, messages 
are frequently stored for elongated periods of  time and/or modified in some way 
before they are accessed by the “destination”. The model suggests that communication 
within a medium is frequently direct and unidirectional, but in the real world of  media, 
communication is almost never unidirectional and is often indirect.
Derivative Models of the Communication Process
One of  these shortcomings is addressed in Figure 2’s intermediary model of  communi-
cation (sometimes referred to as the gatekeeper model or two-step flow (Katz, 1957)). 
This model, which is frequently depicted in introductory texts in mass communication, 
focuses on the important role that intermediaries often play in the communication 
process. Mass communication texts frequently specifically associate editors, who decide 
what stories will fit in a newspaper or news broadcast, with this intermediary or gate-
keeper role. There are, however, many intermediary roles (Foulger, 2002a) associated 
with communication. Many of  these intermediaries have the ability to decide what 
messages others see, the context in which they are seen, and when they see them. They 
often have the ability , moreover, to change messages or to prevent them from reaching 
an audience (destination). In extreme variations we refer to such gatekeepers as censors. 
Under the more normal conditions of  mass media, in which publications choose some 
content in preference to other potential content based on an editorial policy , we refer to 
them as editors (most mass media), moderators (Internet discussion groups), reviewers 
(peer-reviewed publications), or aggregators (clipping services), among other titles . 
Delivery workers (a postal delivery worker, for instance) also act as intermediaries, and 
have the ability to act as gatekeepers, but are generally restricted from doing so as a 
matter of  ethics and/or law .
Speaker Gatekeeper Audience
Figure 3: An Intermediary Model.
Variations of  Figure 3’s gatekeeper model are also used in teaching organizational com-
munication, where gatekeepers, in the form of  bridges and liaisons, have some ability to 
shape the organization through their selective sharing of  information. These variations 
are generally more complex in depiction and often take the form of  social network 
diagrams that depict the interaction relationships of  dozens of  people. They network 
diagrams often presume, or at least allow , bi-directional arrows such that they are more 
consistent with the notion that communication is most often bidirectional. 

136
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
The bidirectionality of  communication is commonly addressed in interpersonal com-
munication text with two elaborations of  Shannon’s model (which is often labeled 
as the action model of  communication): the interactive model and the transactive 
model. The interactive model, a variant of  which is shown in Figure 4, elaborates 
Shannon’s model with the cybernetic concept of  feedback (Weiner, 1948, 1986), often 
(as is the case in Figure 4) without changing any other element of  Shannon’s model. 
The key concept associated with this elaboration is that destinations provide feed-
back on the messages they receive such that the information sources can adapt their 
messages, in real time. This is an important elaboration, and as generally depicted, a 
radically oversimplified one. Feedback is a message (or a set of  messages). The source 
of  feedback is an information source. The consumer of  feedback is a destination. 
Feedback is transmitted, received, and potentially disruptable via noise sources. None 
of  this is visible in the typical depiction of  the interactive model. This doesn’t diminish 
the importance of  feedback or the usefulness of  elaborating Shannon’s model to 
include it. People really do adapt their messages based on the feedback they receive. 
It is useful, however, to notice that the interactive model depicts feedback at a much 
higher level of  abstraction than it does messages.
INFORMATION
SOURCE
TRANSMITTER RECEIVER DESTINATION
MESSAGEM ESSAGE
NOISE
SOURCE
FEEDBACK
SIGNAL RECEIVED
SIGNAL
Figure 4: An Interactive Model
This difference in the level of  abstraction is addressed in the transactional model of  
communication, a variant of  which is shown in Figure 5. This model acknowledges 
neither creators nor consumers of  messages, preferring to label the people associated 
with the model as communicators who both create and consume messages. The 
model presumes additional symmetries as well, with each participant creating mes-
sages that are received by the other communicator. This is, in many ways, an excellent 
model of  the face-to-face interactive process which extends readily to any interactive 
medium that provides users with symmetrical interfaces for creation and consump-
tion of  messages, including notes, letters, C.B. Radio, electronic mail, and the radio. 
It is, however, a distinctly interpersonal model that implies an equality between 
communicators that often doesn’t exist, even in interpersonal contexts. The caller in 
most telephone conversations has the initial upper hand in setting the direction and 
tone of  a a telephone callr than the receiver of  the call (Hopper, 1992).In face-to-face 
head-complement interactions, the boss (head) has considerably more freedom (in 
terms of  message choice, media choice, ability to frame meaning, ability to set the 

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
137
rules of  interaction) and power to allocate message bandwidth than does the employ-
ee (complement). The model certainly does not apply in mass media contexts.
Figure 5: A Transactional Model
The “masspersonal” (xxxxx, 199x) media of  the Internet through this implied symmetry 
into even greater relief. Most Internet media grant everyone symmetrical creation 
and consumption interfaces. Anyone with Internet access can create a web site and 
participate as an equal partner in e-mail, instant messaging, chat rooms, computer 
conferences, collaborative composition sites, blogs, interactive games, MUDs, MOOs, 
and other media. It remains, however, that users have very different preferences in their 
message consumption and creation. Some people are very comfortable creating mes-
sages for others online. Others prefer to “lurk”; to freely browse the messages of  others 
without adding anything of  their own. Adding comments to a computer conference is 
rarely more difficult than sending an e-mail, but most Internet discussion groups have 
many more lurkers (consumers of  messages that never post) than they have contributors 
(people who both create and consume messages). Oddly , the lurkers sometimes feel 
more integrated with the community than the contributors do (Baym, 2000).

138
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
A New Model of the Communication Process
Existing models of  the communication process don’t provide a reasonable basis for 
understanding such effects. Indeed, there are many things that we routinely teach under-
graduates in introductory communication courses that are missing from, or outright 
inconsistent with, these models. Consider that:
• we now routinely teach students that “receivers” of  messages really “consume” 
messages. People usually have a rich menu of  potential messages to choose 
from and they select the messages they want to hear in much the same way 
that diners select entrees from a restaurant menu. We teach students that most 
“noise” is generated within the listener, that we engage messages through 
“selective attention”, that one of  the most important things we can do to 
improve our communication is to learn how to listen, that mass media audienc-
es have choices, and that we need to be “literate” in our media choices, even in 
(and perhaps especially in) our choice of  television messages. Yet all of  these 
models suggest an “injection model” in which message reception is automatic.
• we spend a large portion of  our introductory courses teaching students about 
language, including written, verbal, and non-verbal languages, yet language is 
all but ignored in these models (the use of  the term in Figure 5 is not the usual 
practice in depictions of  the transactive model).
• we spend large portions of  our introductory courses teaching students about 
the importance of  perception, attribution, and relationships to our interpre-
tation of  messages; of  the importance of  communication to the perceptions 
that others have of  us, the perceptions we have of  ourselves, and the creation 
and maintenance of  the relationships we have with others. These models say 
nothing about the role of  perception and relationship to the way we interpret 
messages or our willingness to consume messages from different people.
• we spend large portions of  our introductory courses teaching students about 
the socially constructed aspects of  languages, messages, and media use. 
Intercultural communication presumes both social construction and the pre-
sumption that people schooled in one set of  conventions will almost certainly 
violate the expectations of  people schooled in a different set of  expectations. 
Discussions of  the effects of  media on culture presume that communication 
within the same medium may be very different in different cultures, but that 
the effects of  the medium on various cultures will be more uniform. Existing 
general models provide little in the way of  a platform from which these effects 
can be discussed.
• when we use these models in teaching courses in both interpersonal and mass 
communication; in teaching students about very different kinds of  media. With 
the exception of  the Shannon model, we tend to use these models selectively 
in describing those media, and without any strong indication of  where the 
medium begins or ends; without any indication of  how media interrelate with 
languages, messages, or the people who create and consume messages, without 
addressing the ways in which they are while these media describe, in a general-
ized way , media, 
The ecological model of  communication, shown in Figure 6, attempts to provide a 
platform on which these issues can be explored. It asserts that communication occurs 
in the intersection of  four fundamental constructs: communication between people 
(creators and consumers) is mediated by messages which are created using language 
within media; consumed from media and interpreted using language. This model is, in 

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
139
many ways, a more detailed elaboration of  Lasswell’s (1948) classic outline of  the study 
of  communication: “Who ... says what ... in which channel ... to whom ... with what 
effect”. In the ecological model, the “who” are the creators of  messages, the “says what” 
are the messages, the “in which channel” is elaborated into languages (which are the 
content of  channels) and media (which channels are a component of ), the “to whom” 
are the consumers of  messages, and the effects are found in various relationships 
between the primitives, including relationships, perspectives, attributions, interpreta-
tions, and the continuing evolution of  languages and media.
Figure 6: A Ecological Model of  the Communication Process
A number of  relationships are described in this model: 
1) Messages are created and consumed using language
2) Language occurs within the context of  media
3) Messages are constructed and consumed within the context of  media
4) The roles of  consumer and creator are reflexive. People become creators when 
they reply or supply feedback to other people. Creators become consumers 
when they make use of  feedback to adapt their messages to message consum-
ers. People learn how to create messages through the act of  consuming other 
peoples messages. 
5) The roles of  consumer and creator are introspective. Creators of  messages 
create messages within the context of  their perspectives of  and relationships 
with anticipated consumers of  messages. Creators optimize their messages to 
their target audiences. Consumers of  messages interpret those messages within 
the context of  their perspectives of, and relationships with, creators of  mes-
sages. Consumers make attributions of  meaning based on their opinion of  the 
message creator. People form these perspectives and relationships as a function 
of  their communication.
6) The messages creators of  messages construct are necessarily imperfect rep-
resentations of  the meaning they imagine. Messages are created within the 
expressive limitations of  the medium selected and the meaning representation 
space provided by the language used. The message created is almost always a 
partial and imperfect representation of  what the creator would like to say .
7) A consumers interpretation of  a messages necessarily attributes meaning 
imperfectly . Consumers interpret messages within the limits of  the languages 

140
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
used and the media those languages are used in. A consumers interpretation of  
a message may be very different than what the creator of  a message imagined.
8) People learn language by through the experience of  encountering language 
being used within media. The languages they learn will almost always be the 
languages when communicating with people who already know and use those 
languages. That communication always occurs within a medium that enables 
those languages.
9) People learn media by using media. The media they learn will necessarily be 
the media used by the people they communicate with.
10) People invent and evolve languages. While some behavior expressions (a 
baby’s cry) occur naturally and some aspects of  language structure may mirror 
the ways in which the brain structures ideas, language does not occur natu-
rally . People invent new language when there is no language that they can be 
socialized into. People evolve language when they need to communicate ideas 
that existing language is not sufficient to.
11) People invent and evolve media While some of  the modalities and channels 
associated with communication are naturally occurring, the media we use to 
communicate are not. 
A medium of  communication is, in short, the product of  a set of  complex interactions 
between its primary constituents: messages, people (acting as creators of  messages, 
consumers of  messages, and in other roles), languages, and media. Three of  these 
constituents are themselves complex systems and the subject of  entire fields of  study , 
including psychology , sociology , anthropology (all three of  which study people), linguis-
tics (language), media ecology (media), and communication (messages, language, and 
media). Even messages can be regarded as complex entities, but its complexities can be 
described entirely within the scope of  languages, media, and the people who use them. 
This ecological model of  communication is, in its most fundamental reading, a compact 
theory of  messages and the systems that enable them. Messages are the central feature 
of  the model and the most fundamental product of  the interaction of  people, language, 
and media. But there are other products of  the model that build up from that base of  
messages, including (in a rough ordering to increased complexity) observation, learning, 
interpretation, socialization, attribution, perspectives, and relationships.
Discussion: Positioning the study of media in the field of 
communication
It is in this layering of  interdependent social construction that this model picks up 
its name. Our communication is not produced within any single system, but in the 
intersection of  several interrelated systems, each of  which is self-standing necessarily 
described by dedicated theories, but each of  which is both the product of  the others and, 
in its own limited way , an instance of  the other. The medium is, as McLuhan famously 
observed, a message that is inherent to every message that is created in or consumed 
from a medium. The medium is, to the extent that we can select among media, also a 
language such that the message of  the medium is not only inherent to a message, but 
often an element of  its composition. In what may be the most extreme view enabled 
by the processing of  messages within media, the medium may also be a person and 
consumes messages, recreates them, and makes the modified messages available for 
further consumption. A medium is really none of  these things. It is fundamentally a 
system that enables the construction of  messages using a set of  languages such that they 

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
141
can be consumed. But a medium is also both all of  these things and the product of  their 
interaction. People learn, create, and evolve media as a vehicle for enabling the creation 
and consumption of  messages.
The same might be said of  each of  the constituents of  this model. People can be, and 
often are, the medium (insofar as they act as messengers), the language (insofar as 
different people can be selected as messengers), or the message (one’s choice of  messen-
ger can be profoundly meaningful). Fundamentally a person is none of  these things, but 
they can be used as any of  these things and are the product of  their experience of  all of  
these things. Our experience of  messages, languages, media, and through them, other 
people, is fundamental in shaping who we become and how we think of  ourselves and 
others. We invent ourselves, and others work diligently to shape that invention, through 
our consumption of  messages, the languages we master, and the media we use. 
Language can be, and often are, the message (that is inherent to every message con-
structed with it), the medium (but only trivially), the person (both at the level of  the 
“language instinct” that is inherent to people (following Pinker, xxxxx) and a socialized 
semiotic overlay on personal experience), and even “the language” (insofar as we have 
a choice of  what language we use in constructing a given message). Fundamentally 
a language is none of  these things, but it can be used as any of  these things and is the 
product of  our use of  media to construct messages. We use language, within media, to 
construct messages, such as definitions and dictionaries) that construct language. We 
invent and evolve language as a product of  our communication.
As for messages, they reiterate all of  these constituents. Every message is a partial and 
incomplete precis of  the language that it is constructed with, the medium it is created 
in and consumed from, and the person who created it. Every message we consume 
allows us to learn a little more about the language that we interpret with, the medium 
we create and consume messages in, and the person who created the message. Every 
message we create is an opportunity to change and extend the language we use, evolve 
the media we use, and influence the perspective that consumers of  our messages have 
of  us. Yet fundamentally , a message is simply a message, an attempt to communicate 
something we imagine such that another person can correctly interpret the message and 
thus imagine the same thing.
This welter of  intersecting McLuhanesque/Burkean metaphors and interdependencies 
provides a second source of  the models name. This model seeks, more than anything, 
to position language and media as the intermediate building blocks on which com-
munication is built. The position of  language as a building block of  messages and and 
communication is well understood. Over a century of  study in semantics, semiotics, 
and linguistics have produced systematic theories of  message and language production 
which are well understood and generally accepted. The study of  language is routinely 
incorporated into virtually all programs in the field of  communication, including 
journalism, rhetoric and speech, film, theater, broadcast media, language arts, speech 
and hearing sciences telecommunications, and other variants, including departments 
of  “language and social interaction”. The positioning of  the study of  media within the 
field of  communication is considerably more tenuous. Many departments, including 
most of  those named in this paragraph, focus almost entirely on only one or two media, 
effectively assuming the medium such that the focus of  study can be constrained to the 

142
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
art of  message production and interpretation, with a heavy focus on the languages of  
the medium and little real introspection about what it means to use that medium in 
preference to another or the generalized ways in which all media are invented, learned, 
evolved, socialized, selected or used meaningfully .
Such is, however, the primary subject matter of  the newly emerging discipline of  media 
ecology , and this model can be seen as an attempt to position media ecology relative to 
language and messages as a building block of  our communication. This model was cre-
ated specifically to support theories of  media and position them relative to the process 
of  communication. It is hoped that the reader finds value in that positioning.
Conclusion: Theoretical and Pedagogical Value
Models are a fundamental building block of  theory . They are also a fundamental tool 
of  instruction. Shannon’s information theory model, Weiner’s Cybernetic model, and 
Katz’ two step flow each allowed allowed scholars decompose the process of  com-
munication into discrete structural elements. Each provides the basis for considerable 
bodies of  communication theory and research. Each model also provides teachers with 
a powerful pedagogical tool for teaching students to understand that communication is 
a complex process in which many things can, and frequently do, go wrong; for teaching 
students the ways in which they can perfect different skills at different points in the 
communication process to become more effective communicators. But while Shannon’s 
model has proved effective across the primary divides in the field of  communication, the 
other models Katz’ and Weiner’s models have not. Indeed, they in many ways exemplify 
that divide and the differences in what is taught in courses oriented to interpersonal 
communication and mass communication. 
Weiner’s cybernetic model accentuates the interactive structure of  communication. 
Katz’ model accentuates its production structure. Students of  interpersonal com-
munication are taught, through the use of  the interactive/cybernetic and transactive 
models that attending to the feedback of  their audience is an important part of  being 
an effective communicator. Students of  mass communication are taught, through the 
intermediary/gatekeeper/two-step flow model, that controlled production processes 
are an important part of  being an effective communicator. The difference is a small 
one and there is no denying that both attention to feedback and attention to detail are 
critical skills of  effective communicators, but mass media programs focus heavily on 
the minutiae of  production, interpersonal programs focus heavily on the minutiae of  
attention to feedback. Despite the fact that both teach both message production the 
languages used in message production, and the details of  the small range of  media that 
each typically covers, they discuss different media, to some extent different languages, 
and different approaches to message production. These differences, far more than more 
obvious differences like audience size or technology , are the divides that separate the 
study of  interpersonal communication from mass communication.
The ecological model of  communication presented here cannot, by itself, remediate 
such differences, but it does reconstitute and extend these models in ways that make 
it useful, both pedagogically and theoretically , across the normal disciplinary bound-
aries of  the field of  communication. The author has made good use of  the model in 
teaching a variety of  courses within several communication disciplines, including on 
interpersonal communication, mass media criticism, organizational communication, 

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
143
communication ethics, communication in relationships and communities, and new 
communication technologies. In introductory Interpersonal Communication classes 
the model has shown considerable value in outlining and tying together such diverse 
topics as the social construction of  the self, verbal and non-verbal languages, listening, 
relationship formation and development, miscommunication, perception, attribution, 
and the ways in which communication changes in different interpersonal media. In an 
Organizational Communication class the model has proved value in tying contemporary 
Organizational models, including network analysis models, satisficing, and Weick’s 
model to key organizational skills like effective presentation, listening, and matching the 
medium to the goal and the stakeholder. In a communication ethics class it has proved 
valuable in elaborating the range of  participants in media who have ethical responsibil-
ities and the scope of  their responsibilities. In a mass media criticism class it has proved 
useful in showing how different critical methods relate to the process of  communication 
and to each other. In each course the model has proved valuable, not only in giving 
students tools with which they can decompose communication, but which they can 
organize the course materials into a cohesive whole.
While the model was originally composed for pedagogical purposes, the primary value 
for the author has been theoretical. The field of  communication encompasses a wide 
range of  very different and often unintegrated theories and methods. Context-based 
gaps in the field like the one between mass media and interpersonal communication 
have been equated to those of  “two sovereign nations,” with “different purposes, differ-
ent boundaries”, “different methods”, and “different theoretical orientations” (Berger 
and Chaffee, 1988), causing at least some to doubt that the field can ever be united by 
a common theory of  communication (Craig, 1999). xxxxx The author repeatedly finds 
these gaps and boundaries problematic
It may be that complex model of  the communication process that bridges the theo-
retical orientations of  interpersonal, organizational, and mass media perspectives can 
help to bridge this gap and provide something more than the kind of  metamodel that 
Craig calls for. Defining media directly into the process of  communication may help 
to provide the kind of  substrate that would satisfy Cappella’s (1991) suggestion we 
can “remake the field by altering the organizational format”, replacing contexts with 
processes that operate within the scope of  media. This perspective does exactly that. 
The result does not integrate all of  communication theory , but it may provide a useful 
starting point on which a more integrated communication theory can be built. The 
construction of  such theory is the author’s primary objective in forwarding this model 
for your comment and, hopefully , your response. 

144
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
References
Reference list in progress.
Adler, R. B. and Rodman, G. (1991). Understanding Human Communication. Chicago; 
Holt, Rinehart, and Winston. 
Adler, R. B., Rosenfeld, L. B., and Towne, N. (1996). Interplay: The Process of  
Interpersonal Communication. New York; Harcourt Brace. 
Attenborough, David. (2002). The Life of  Birds. BBC Video.
Barker, L. L. and Barker, D. L. (1993). Communication. Prentice Hall. 
Baym, N. K. Tune In, Log On: Soaps, Fandom, and the Online Community . Newbury 
Park, CA; Sage, 2000. 
Becker, S. L. and Roberts, C. L. (1992). Discovering Mass Communication. 
HarperCollins. 
Bell, A. G. (date unknown). Sketch of  the workings of  a telephone, from his original 
sketches. Bell Family Papers; Library of  Congress. Original image retrieved from http://
memory .loc.gov/mss/mcc/004/0001.jpg
Berger, C. R. and Chaffee, S. H. On Bridging the Communication Gap. Human 
Communication Research, 15.2 (1988), pp. 311-318. 
Bittner, J. R. (1996). Mass Communication. Boston; Allyn and Bacon. 
Burgoon, M., Hunsaker, F . G., and Dawson, E. J. (1994). Human Communication. 
Thousand Oaks, CA; Sage.
Cappella, J. (1991). Book Reviews: Theories of  Human Communication. Communication 
Theory. v1.2. May , 1991, p. 165-171. 
Craig, R. T . (1999). Communication Theory as a Field. Communication Theory , 9, p. 
119-161. 
DeFleur, M. L., Kearney , P ., and Plax, T . G. (1993). Mastering Communication in 
Contemporary America. Mountain View , CA; Mayfield. 
Devito, J. A. (1994) Human Communication: The Basic Course. New York; 
HarperCollins. 
Ford, John and Vicki Mabry . (2001). Dialects of  the Whales. 60 Minutes II. January 17, 
2001. Retrieved from: 
 Ø http://www .cbsnews.com/stories/2001/01/16/60II/main264695.shtml.

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
145
Foulger, D. (2002a). Roles in Media. Presented at National Communication Association 
Summer Conference, May , 2002. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://evolutonarymedia.com/papers/rolesInMedia.htm.
Foulger, D. (2002b). The Invention and Evolution of  Media. Presented at National 
Communication Assocation; November, 2002. Viewed at Retrieved from: 
 Ø http://evolutonarymedia.com/papers/hammerAsMedium.htm.
Foulger, D. (In preparation). An Ecological Model of  the Communication Process. 
Retrieved from: 
 Ø http://davis.foulger.info/papers/ecologicalModelOfCommunication.htm.
Fulton, John. (2003). The Parrot Keyboard: A Human Factors Approach to Non-
Human Computer Interaction — or — Why My Parrot Needs a Keyboard of  His Own. 
Capstone Presentation. Masters Degree in Computer Science. Franklin University . 
March 15, 2003. Retrieved from: 
 Ø http://www .parrotkeyboard.com/presentation.html.
Gibson, J. W . and Hanna, M. S. (1992). Introduction to Human Communication. 
Dubuque, IA; William C. Brown. 
Giddens, A. (1986). The Constitution of  Society: Outline of  the Theory of  
Structuration.University of  California Press.
Hillix, W . A. , D. M. Rumbaugh, and A. Hillix. (2004). Animal Bodies, Human Minds: 
Ape, Dolphin, and Parrot Language Skills. Plenum.
Innis, Harold A. (1950). Empire and Communications. Oxford University Press. 
Katz, E. (1957). The Two-Step Flow of  Communication. Public Opinion Quarterly , 21, 
p. 61-78. 
Lasswell, H. (1948). The Structure and Function of  Communication in Society . In “The 
Communication of  Ideas”. Bryson, Lymon (ed). New York: Institute for Religious and 
Social Studies, p. 37-51. 
Levinson, P . (2001). Digital McLuhan: A Guide to the Information Millennium. Routledge. 
Masson, J. M. and S. McCarthy . (1995). When Elephants Weep: The Emotional Lives of  
Animals. New York, Delacorte. 

146
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
McLuhan, Marshall. (1964). Understanding Media: The Extensions of  Man. McGraw-Hill. 
Meyrowitz, J. (1986). No Sense of  Place: The Impact of  Electronic Media on Social 
Behavior. Oxford University Press. 
Ong, W . (1982). Orality and Literacy . Methuen and Company .
Pepperberg, I. M. (2002). The Alex Studies: Cognitive and Communicative Abilities of  
Grey Parrots. Harvard University Press
Pinker, S. (2000). The Language Instinct : How the Mind Creates Language. Perennial. 
Postman, N. (1986). Amusing Ourselves to Death: Public Discourse in the Age of  Show 
Business. Viking.
Shannon, C. E. A (1948). Mathematical Theory of  Communication. Bell System 
Technical Journal, vol. 27, pp. 379-423 and 623-656, July and October, 1948. 
Watzlawick, P , Beavin, J.H., & Jackson, D.D. (1967). Pragmatics of  Human Communication: 
A Study of  Interactional Patterns, Pathologies, and Paradoxes. New York: W W Norton. 
Weiner, N. (1948). Cybernetics: or Control and Communication in the Animal and the 
Machine. Wiley .
Weiner, N. (1986). Human Use of  Human Beings: Cybernetics and Society . Avon.
Wood, J. T . (2002). Interpersonal Communication: Everyday Encounters. Wadsworth/
Thomson Learning. 

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
147
Unit 2, week 4, session 7 Student Teacher Reading
Social Interaction
Schools are places where many social interactions occur. Some are between teachers 
and students. Others are between students and students. These interactions spill 
over into the community as well. Students and teachers both have social interactions 
within a community that includes parents, families, neighbours, friends, and acquain-
tances. Sometimes these interactions involve things going on at school. 
When we talk about social interaction, we are usually thinking about the way in 
which people engage and react to each other. One person acts in response to another. 
Through social interaction, people and groups are able to work together to meet goals 
and overcome problems. These are positive social interactions. 
Sometimes social interactions involve competition over goals or resources. This can be 
positive or it can be negative. Sometimes conflict occurs. When people are unable to 
manage conflict in positive ways, social interactions become negative. 
Social interactions begin when people meet each other. They happen at home as well 
as in the world outside of  the home. Sometimes social interactions are just by chance. 
For example, two people happen to meet in passing. Or sometimes social interactions 
are planned, such as when a teacher prepares for classes. The teacher decides the 
kinds of  questions to ask students and to put them in groups to discuss the questions. 
The teacher is making a plan for social interaction. Whether social interactions are 
planned or unplanned, the people who interact influence each other in some way . 
T ypes of social interaction
There are many ways to think about social interaction. One way is to think of  types 
of  social interaction, such as the ways people cooperate, the kinds of  conflict they 
have and how they resolve their conflicts. People who study social interaction often 
identify many different kinds of  interactions, but one way to think about interactions 
is to categorize them into five categories: cooperation, conflict, competition, assimila-
tion, and accommodation.
Cooperation is a type of  interaction where individuals or groups work together to 
accomplish a goal or task. Cooperation can be positive or negative. For example, 
members of  a gang might engage in cooperative behaviour in order to rob an elderly 
man. This is negative cooperation, or cooperation towards a negative goal. Positive 
cooperation occurs when people work together towards democratic goals.
Conflict happens when people disagree with each other. Conflict can become violent 
if  they cannot agree on how to resolve their differences or neither side will give up its 
claim on something they both want. Conflict does not have to be a bad thing, though. 
Conflict can be stimulating when people can agree to disagree. It challenges them to 
really think about their ideas. 
S

148
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Competition is an interaction where people want something that is in limited supply . 
It might be competition to win a game or a prize. Or it might be over something very 
serious, such as water or farmland. Competition may involve conflict when the ‘prize’ 
is of  great worth or when only one side can enjoy the rewards of  winning.
Accommodation happens when people adjust their behaviour and language in order 
to get along or to resolve a conflict. Sometimes an individual accommodates to the 
group and sometimes the group makes room for the individual. 
Assimilation is the gradual process of  taking on the language, values, and goals of  
another group. When you can no longer tell the difference between a new member 
and other members of  a group, you can say that the new member has been assimilat-
ed. The habits, values, ways of  speaking, ways of  dressing, and the like of  the group 
have become those of  the new member.
Children and social interaction
Children spend a great deal of  their time in school. This is a time to learn how to 
interact with others outside the family in positive ways. Most children have good and 
bad experiences with others at school. Sometimes they disagree with others, compete 
for friends, or feel left out. But there are usually more good interactions than bad. 
Teachers need to be aware of  the kinds of  social interactions that are happening 
among children. It is important for them to know families and be able to talk with 
parents and caregivers about children’s social interaction. 
When children practise cooperation and appropriate conflict management at school, 
they are likely to have a better experience at school. They are also preparing for life 
outside school in the years beyond. When children do not know how to engage in 
positive social interaction, it can be that destructive to the classroom environment and 
make it difficult for a teacher to build a classroom community . The quotation below is 
from a psychologist who has studied children’s experiences in school. 
When there is substantial negative behavior in a classroom, it affects everyone. 
When students are harmed by their peers, and no one does anything to stop it or 
to support the person who was harmed, it teaches everyone that this is an unkind 
world. It also interferes with learning. It is not always easy to know where to draw 
the line between playful if  somewhat negative interactions, letting children deal 
with their own problems, or taking positive action (Staub, 2003).
Most teachers will encounter children who have limited ability to interact socially in 
their classrooms. Most teachers will find an occasional child who engages in negative 
social behaviour that disrupts learning and community building. When social inter-
actions within the school and community are strong and positive, the teacher has 
many resources to draw on in helping children who need to learn appropriate ways to 
interact with each other and with adults around them.

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
149
References
E. Staub, The Psychology of  Good and Evil: Why Children, Adults and Groups Help and 
Harm Others (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003).
E. Staub, ‘Many Students Are Happy , Others Bullied, Some Excluded, Active 
Bystandership Helps’, Psychology Today (published 29 April 2012) 
 Ø http://www .psychologytoday .com/blog/in-the-garden-good-and-evil/201204/
many-students-are-happy-others-bullied-some-excluded-active-, accessed 16 February

150
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 2, week 5, session 9 Faculty Resource
The following resource is adapted from a working paper about peace education. The 
full paper can be downloaded at: 
 Ø http://www .spaceforpeace.net/pe.phtml
More resources for peace education to download and use are available on the same 
website, Space for Peace.
What Is Peace Education?: Working Paper
Thoughts about peace
Peace is a way of  living together in which people give their fellow creatures the space 
and, if  necessary , the mutual support to live their lives to the fullest.
This ‘space’ and these activities can and should happen on different levels:
• spiritual 
• on the level of  the psyche 
• interpersonal 
• social 
• economical 
• political.
Peace is a very wide concept indeed. It has to do with the deepest roots of  our being 
human and with the world at large. To make this reality concrete within a definition is 
far from simple.
 
It can mean the absence of  war, terror, violence – and the absence of  oppression and 
discrimination by political or economic powers. 
 
More actively formulated peace might be understood as respect for the right of  every 
human being. 
 
Peace can also refer to a viable ecological balance.
Peace is possible when people try to communicate beyond barriers and create 
mutual understanding.
We might also make a distinction between two kinds of  peace: small peace and big peace. 
• Small is the kind of  peace between people as individuals.
• Big peace is the one between societies, civilizations, nations, and powers.
Peace is appealing and inspiring. 
It is something that cannot ever be achieved fully – it is a permanent engagement.
F

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
151
What do we mean by ‘peace education’?
Trying to define ‘peace’ is in itself  a form of  peace education. 
Peace education means to learn about and to learn for peace.
Learning about peace means obtaining knowledge and understanding of  what contrib-
utes to peace, what damages it, what leads to war, what does ‘peace’ mean on each 
level anyway , what is my role in it, and how are the different levels connected.
Learning for peace means learning the skills, attitudes, and values that one needs in 
order to contribute to peace and help maintain it. For example, this means learning 
to deal with conflict without the recourse of  violence, learning to think creatively , 
learning to apply the methods of  active non-violence, or learning to deal with cultural 
differences in a constructive way . 
Peace education focuses on creating mental changes or conditions. It should enable 
people to live together in a peaceful way , to resolve conflicts in a non-violent manner.

152
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 3, week 6 and following Faculty Resource
Retrieved from http://anthro.palomar.edu/language/language_5.htm. For classroom 
use only . Used by permission of  the author. Additional material on language and 
culture may be found on the same website.
Language and Thought Processes
Language is more than just a means of  communication. It influences our culture and 
even our thought processes. During the first four decades of  the 20th century , language 
was viewed by American linguists and anthropologists as being more important than 
it actually is in shaping our perception of  reality . This was mostly due to Edward Sapir 
and his student Benjamin Whorf  who said that language predetermines what we see in 
the world around us. In other words, language acts like a polarizing lens on a camera in 
filtering reality--we see the real world only in the categories of  our language.
YOU YOUR 
LANGUAGE “REALITY”
Cross cultural comparisons of  such things as color terms were 
used by Sapir and Whorf  as evidence of  this hypothesis. When 
we perceive color with our eyes, we are sensing that portion of  
electromagnetic radiation that is visible light. In fact, the spec-
trum of  visible light is a continuum of  light waves with frequen-
cies that increase at a continuous rate from one end to the other. 
In other words, there are no distinct colors like red and green in 
nature. Our culture, through language, guides us in seeing the 
spectrum in terms of  the arbitrarily established categories that 
we call colors. Different cultures may divide up the spectrum in different ways. This 
can be seen in the comparison of  some English language colors with their counter-
parts in the Tiv language of  Nigeria:
English Tiv
green
blue
gray
brown
nyianred
yellow
pupu
(low value)
ii
(high value)
F
Note: value refers to the lightness or darkness of  a color. High value is light and low 
value is dark.

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
153
Sapir and Whorf  interpreted these data as indicating that colors are not objective, 
naturally determined segments of  reality . In other words, the colors we see are pre-
determined by what our culture prepares us to see. This example used to support the 
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis was objectively tested in the 1960’s. That research indicated 
that they went too far. All normal humans share similar sense perceptions of  color 
despite differences in color terminology from one language to another. The physiolo-
gy of  our eyes is essentially the same. People all over the world can see subtle grada-
tions of  color and can comprehend other ways of  dividing up the spectrum of  visible 
light. However, as a society’s economy and technology increase in complexity , the 
number of  color terms usually also increases. That is to say , the spectrum of  visible 
light gets subdivided into more categories. As the environment changes, culture and 
language typically respond by creating new terminology to describe it.
It is now clear that the terminology used by a 
culture primarily reflects that culture’s interests 
and concerns. For instance, Indians in Canada’s 
Northwest Territories typically have at least 
13 terms for different types and conditions of  
snow , while most non-skiing native Southern 
Californians use only 2 terms--ice and snow . That 
does not mean that the English language only has 
2 terms. Quite the contrary , there are many more 
English words that refer to different states of  fro-
zen water, such as blizzard, dusting, flurry , frost, hail, hardpack, powder, sleet, slush, 
and snowflake. The point is that these terms are rarely if  ever used by people living 
in tropical or subtropical regions because they rarely encounter frozen water in any 
form other than ice cubes. The distinctions between different snow conditions are not 
relevant to everyday life and children may not even have the words explained to them. 
However, people in these warmer regions make fine distinctions about other phenom-
ena that are important to them. For instance, coastal Southern Californians often have 
dozens of  surfing related words that would likely be unknown to most Indians in the 
Northwest Territories or to people living in Britain for that matter. 
NOTE: In 1976 Paul Kay , a University of  California, Berkeley linguistics professor, led 
a team of  researchers in collecting color terms used by 110 different languages around 
the world. Reexamining these data in 2006, Delwin Lindsey and Angela Brown of  Ohio 
State University , Columbus discovered that most languages in this study do not make 
a distinction between green and blue. Further, the closer the homeland of  a language 
group is to the equator the less likely they are to distinguish between green and blue. 
Lindsey suggests as a possible explanation that people in intensely sunny environments, 
such as open country near the equator, have had their ability to see color altered due to 
the yellowing of  the eye lens caused by excessive ultraviolet radiation.

154
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
The number of  terms related to a particular topic also may be greater or smaller depend-
ing on such social factors as gender. For example, North American women generally make 
far more color distinctions than do men. This may be largely due to the fact that subtle 
color differences are important factors in women’s clothing and makeup. Parents and peers 
usually encourage and train girls early to be knowledgeable about these distinctions.
The cultural environment that people grow up in 
can have surprising effects on how they interpret 
the world around them. This became apparent 
during a Washington D.C. murder trial in 2002. A 
deaf  man was convicted of  stabbing to death two 
of  his classmates at Gallaudet University . At his 
trial, the defendant said that he was told to do it 
by mysterious black-gloved hands. His delusions 
did not come in the form of  spoken language. He 
was told to commit these brutal murders through 
sign language--his mode of  communication. Another example is provided by Guugu 
Timithirr language speakers of  the Cape York Peninsula in northeastern Australia. 
This group of  Aborigines do not have words for left, right, front, or back. They use 
absolute rather than relative directions. When they refer to people or objects in 
their environment, they use compass directions. They would say “I am standing 
southwest of  my sister” rather than “I am standing to the left of  my sister.” Critics 
of  the Sapir-Whorf  hypothesis would point out that the Aborigines who speak this 
language also usually learn English and can use left, right, front, and back just as we 
do. However, if  they do not learn English during early childhood, they have difficul -
ty in orienting themselves relatively and absolute orientation makes much more 
sense to them.

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
155
Ethnoscience
Anthropologists have found that learning about how people categorize things in 
their environment provides important insights into the interests, concerns, and 
values of  their culture. Field workers involved in this type of  research refer to it as 
ethnoscience. These ethnoscientists have made a useful distinction in regards to ways 
of  describing categories of  reality . Visitors to another society can bring their own cul-
ture’s categories and interpret everything in those terms. However, there will be little 
understanding of  the minds of  the people in the society being visited. In contrast, the 
visitors can suspend their own culture’s perspective and learn the categories of  reality 
in the new society . By doing this, they gain a much more profound understanding 
of  the other culture. Ethnoscientists define these two different approaches as being 
etic and emic. Etic categories involve a classification according to some external 
system of  analysis brought in by the visitor. This is the approach of  biology in using 
the Linnaean classification system to define new species. It assumes that ultimately , 
there is an objective reality and that is more important than cultural perceptions of  
it. In contrast, emic categories involve a classification according to the way in which 
members of  a society classify their own world. It may tell us little about the objective 
reality but it is very insightful in understanding how other people perceive that reality 
through the filter of  their language and culture.
This page was last updated on Tuesday , October 24, 2006.
Copyright © 1998-2006 by Dennis O’Neil. All rights reserved

156
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Unit 3, week 6, session 12 Student T eacher Reading
The Culture of School and the Challenge 
of Diversity
by Frances Schoonmaker, Professor Emeritus, Teachers College, Columbia University .
For classroom use only . 
S
In 1932, the sociologist Willard Waller wrote what became a classic book for students 
of  education, The Sociology of  Teaching. In the book, he looked at schools as organiza-
tions, each with its own unique context and culture. He talked about the school as a 
system of  social relationships. Teachers gets caught up in these relationships and often 
do not realize how much they affect the school, students, and their ability to work 
in the school. Relationships are both interpersonal and professional. These include: 
teacher–pupil, teacher–parent, and teacher–other colleagues, among others. The way 
people view teachers, students, and schools influences their relationships within and 
outside school. How school people think about people, particularly children, who are 
different influences relationships within and outside school as well. 
Waller also pointed out how school people often work against, rather than with, the 
communities that surround them. He argued that you cannot change schools without 
involving teachers; it is teachers who can ultimately bring about reform. Schools 
that do not welcome difference are unlikely to change unless teachers insist that all 
children are educated with respect and dignity . 
Since Waller’s time, sociologists have continued to think about the school as a unique 
culture. The culture of  the school surrounds and shapes teachers’ work. Teachers are 
influenced by the schools in which they work and schools are influenced by teachers. 
Schools are influenced by the communities in which they are located and communi-
ties are influenced by their schools.
Many years after Waller, the sociologist Seymore Sarason wrote The Culture of  the 
School and the Problem of  Change (1996). This too became a classic in education. Sarason 
began by talking about schools as miniature societies, asking how visitors from outer 
space could make sense of  what they observed about a school and its community . 
Sarason wrote that a school will reflect the society around it, but it develops its own 
regular ways of  doing things. Two schools in the same community will have their 
own culture reflecting the community , but also reflecting the relationships that go on 
within the school. 
A school culture is the way that people relate to each other in the school. It is made 
up of  the norms, values, procedures, assumptions, beliefs, traditions, and expectations 
of  those within. It is easy to enter a school and get caught up in its culture without 
realizing what is happening. All the rituals and routines – such as how the day begins, 
the schedule for the whole school, how teachers are expected to use their time, how 
classrooms are arranged – all seem to be just the way things are. We seldom stop 
to consider how the culture has developed. Sarason argued that because our own 
FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
157
assumptions about education are implicit, we go on about our work as if  things are 
the way they should be. Sarason (1996) noted that before one can begin to tackle the 
challenges within a particular school or think about how best to approach nationwide 
school reform, one must recognize that schools are, in fact, community settings. As 
such, schools have their own distinct cultures and characteristics – and these are often 
difficult for those not involved with the school to understand.
Nobody comes to school as a blank page. Teachers have had hundreds of  hours of  
experience in classrooms from the time they were students. This prior experience has 
shaped their ideas about what teachers should do, how schools should be run, how 
children learn, whose ideas are valuable, who to include and exclude, and the role 
of  parents. All this is coupled with impressions gathered from the mass media and 
classes on education. The same is true for students – that is, they come with ideas and 
opinions about what school is and should be.
If  you think about the schools you know , you can begin to identify what Sarason 
called ‘behavioural regularities’ – that is the ways you can count on people to behave 
during the school day/week. Every school has them, but they are not always the same 
from school to school. Some behavioural regularities will reflect influences from the 
community around the school. Others are the result of  what happens within the 
school. Often, these regularities have gone on for years in the same way with little 
change. Some contribute to positive outcomes and some to negative outcomes for 
teachers and for children.
School culture can be damaging to teachers and students who are perceived as 
‘outsiders’. If  the school is not welcoming of  cultural diversity , those who do not 
fit in can have a miserable experience. Sometimes students of  another race, tribal 
group, religion, or social class are made to feel inferior by teachers and students. This 
happens in hundreds of  small ways as they are overlooked, excluded, or treated as a 
stereotype rather than a real person. 
Schools that are concerned about educational and social equity attempt to create a 
school culture that promotes cultural diversity through multicultural education. Usually , 
multicultural education is seen broadly to include all forms of  diversity , including diver-
sity in race, class, gender, religion, intellectual, emotional, and physical ability .
According to Banks (2004), multicultural education has three major aims:
• to reform schools and other educational institutions so that students from   
 diverse racial, ethnic, and social class groups will experience educational equity
• to give male and female students an equal chance to experience success and mobility
• to understand how the interaction of  race, class, and gender influences education.

158
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
In order to promote multicultural aims, however, educators need to think about what 
supports school culture where exclusion is practised. Who benefits from the way 
things are within a community or within the school? How does exclusion or prejudice 
show up in the classroom, the school, or the community? 
The school as an organization, its curriculum, the human interactions within the 
school – all of  these can be thought about in terms of  promoting or repressing cultur-
al diversity . By becoming aware of  the culture of  a school and its community , teachers 
can begin to uncover ways to bring about change so that all students are treated fairly 
and justly .
References
J. A. Banks, ‘Multicultural Education: Historical Development, Dimensions, and 
Practice’, in J.A. Banks and C.A. McGee Banks (eds.), Handbook of  Research on 
Multicultural Education (2nd edn.) (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2004).
S. Sarason, Revisiting ‘the Culture of  the School and the Problem of  Change’ (The Series on 
School Reform) (Sociology of  Education Series) (New York: Teachers College Press, 1996).
W . W . Waller, The Sociology of  Teaching (New York: Wiley , 1932).

FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
159
Unit 3, week 8, session 15 Student T eacher Reading
 
Is Media Changing Society and Culture 
in Pakistan?
It doesn’t take a skilled researcher or a policy analyst to see that media is changing the 
way society functions in most of  the world. Zaidi and Sharif  say , ‘Digital media brings 
revolutionary changes which are silently practiced in our society . Digital media is a 
part of  everyday life, and it [exerts] influence on us as a consumer’ (p. 2). Media influ-
ence is everywhere: television, mobile phones, radio, interactive computer games, 
the Internet, e-mail, social networks, YouTube – to name a few . It isn’t a question of  if 
media is changing society and culture, but to what extent is media changing Pakistani 
society and culture. 
Some people worry about the negative influence of  media. They point to negative 
values of  violence, consumerism, and exploitation that are apparent in modern films, 
television, and games. The fear is that the media will lead to erosion of  values. They 
worry that people believe everything they see in the press or read online. The fear is 
that extremists will capitalize on misinformation and gain power. They are concerned 
that there is a great divide separating those who have access to digital media and those 
who don’t have access. The fear is that society will become more and more fragment-
ed. Others talk about flexible work schedules as people are able to work from home 
and about the availability of  information at our fingertips. They argue that one of  the 
advantages of  mass media today is that we can be aware of  the needs of  a world larger 
than the one immediately around us and we can see ourselves as part of  a world 
community , caring for one another. 
Zaidi and Sharif  note that:
S
Digital media has a connection all over the world it is a mass communication technique 
that entertains, informs and influences people. Emphasize [sic] on information or 
communication is also making the world more critical than ever before. It creates 
de-centralization in society . It also creates cultural diversity and communication 
gap among masses so there is a decline of  public sphere as the lives are becoming 
individualized (p. 2).
Zaidi and Sharif  go on to argue that media is changing Pakistani society in both 
negative and positive ways. 
In addressing fears that media is changing society in negative ways, Khan (2010) points 
out that there is no empirical evidence for ‘[t]he impression that the media could sole-
ly and independently play a role in making society and the people [behave] in a certain 
way’. Of  more importance is how the Pakistani government can and should support 
media policies that promote both responsible use and freedom of  expression.
160
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
In a democratic country like Pakistan where freedom of  speech and expression is 
guaranteed to every citizen by the Constitution. This fundamental right has to be 
exercised by all with due care to ensure that it may not incite violence, terrorism, 
racial, ethnic or religious discrimination, sectarianism, extremism, militancy , hatred, 
pornography , obscenity , vulgarity or anything offensive to the commonly accepted 
standards of  decency . Similarly , the sanctity of  national institutions needs to be 
respected at all costs (Khan, 2010).
Ideally , media can create a bond between the many ethnic groups within Pakistan, 
bringing them closer together and contributing to national cohesiveness. It can be a 
tool for reaching remote areas with needed services, including education. 
References
A. Khan, Electronic Media in Pakistan (published in 2010)
 Ø http://zjeddy .wordpress.com/2010/07/28/electronic-media-in-pakistan-by-azam-khan/, 
accessed on 23 July 2012.
S. Zaidi and K. Sharif. ‘Effects of  Third Wave of  Revolution on Pakistani Society’, 
Global Media Journal, Fall 2011
 Ø www .aiou.edu.pk/gmj/, accessed on 23 July 2012.
Questions to think about
1) How has print media influenced you and your family?
2) In what ways do you make use of  electronic media?
3) How might teachers use social media to strengthen school and community ties? 
FACULTY RESOURCES:  School, Community, and T eacher
161
Unit 4, week 10, session 20 Faculty Resource
Culturally Responsive Pedagogy
The following quotations are from a practitioner brief  by Richards, Brown, and 
Forde about diversity in classrooms. You might separate the statements and give one 
to small groups of  students (i.e. six students). Organize a readers theatre to present 
the ideas (see ‘Methods and Strategies’ section in the Course Guide). Give students an 
opportunity to consider each reading and discuss how it relates to them personally . 
What are ways teachers might implement the ideas discussed?
You could also create a handout to use in class, asking students to work in small 
groups to read and discuss each statement. Ask them to think about examples from 
their own experience that illustrate the ideas expressed.
1) Because teachers’ values impact relationships with students and their families, 
teachers must reconcile negative feelings towards any cultural, language, or 
ethnic group. Often teachers are resistant to the notion that their values might 
reflect prejudices or even racism towards certain groups (p. 5).
2) It is important that teachers learn about the lives and experiences of  other 
groups in order to understand how different historical experiences have shaped 
attitudes and perspectives of  various groups. Further, by learning about other 
groups, teachers begin to see differences between their own values and those of  
other groups (p. 6).
3) By continuing a traditional “conform-or-fail” approach to instruction, teachers 
perpetuate a monocultural institution. By questioning traditional policies and 
practices, and by becoming culturally responsive in instruction, teachers work 
toward changing the institution (p. 8).
4) Teachers can be role models, demonstrating fairness and reminding students 
that difference is normal. Further, teachers need to monitor what types of  
behaviors and communication styles are rewarded and praised. Oftentimes 
these behaviors and ways of  communicating are aligned with cultural practices. 
Care must be taken so as not to penalize a student’s behavior just because of  a 
cultural difference (p. 9).
5) Teachers must encourage students to become active learners who regulate 
their own learning through reflection and evaluation. Students who are 
actively engaged in their learning ask questions rather than accept informa -
tion uncritically (p. 10).
6) Although the curriculum may be dictated by the school system, teachers teach 
it. Where the curriculum falls short in addressing the needs of  all students, 
teachers must provide a bridge; where the system reflects cultural and linguistic 
insensitivity , teachers must demonstrate understanding and support (p. 11).
F

162
ASSOCIATE DEGREE IN EDUCATION/B.ED (HONS) ELEMENTARY
Resources
H. V . Richards, A. F . Brown, and T . B. Forde, ‘ Addressing Diversity in Schools: 
Culturally Responsive Pedagogy’, Practitioner Brief  (New York: NCCRest, 2006). 
 Ø http://www .nccrest.org/Briefs/Diversity_Brief.pdf.
S. Zion, T . Zion, and K. King, Module 2: Culturally Responsive Pedagogy and Practice – 
Academy 2: Culturally Responsive Classrooms (V ersion 1.0) (New York: NCCRest, 2008). 

