Test Development 
and Evaluation
WINDOWS ON PRACTICE GUIDE
B.Ed. (Hons.) Elementary
semester 8
2012
This product has been made possible by the support of  the American People through the United States Agency for 
International Development (USAID). The contents of  this report are the sole responsibility of  the authors, and do 
not necessarily reflect the views of  USAID or the United States Government.
Technical Support: Education Development Center (EDC); Teachers College, Columbia University
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
ii
Foreword
Teacher education in Pakistan is leaping into the future. This updated Scheme of  Studies is the latest 
milestone in a journey that began in earnest in 2006 with the development of  a National Curriculum, 
which was later augmented by the 2008 National Professional Standards for Teachers in Pakistan and 
the 2010 Curriculum of  Education Scheme of  Studies. With these foundations in place, the Higher 
Education Commission (HEC) and the USAID Teacher Education Project engaged faculty across the 
nation to develop detailed syllabi and course guides for the four-year B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary and the 
two-year Associate Degree in Education (ADE).
The syllabi and course guides have been reviewed by the National Curriculum Review Committee 
(NCRC ) and the syllabi are approved as the updated Scheme of  Studies for the ADE and B.Ed. (Hons) 
Elementary programmes.
As an educator, I am especially inspired by the creativity and engagement of  this updated Scheme of  
Studies. It offers the potential for a seismic change in how we educate our teachers and ultimately our 
country’s youngsters. Colleges and universities that use programmes like these provide their students 
with the universally valuable tools of  critical thinking, hands-on learning, and collaborative study .
I am grateful to all who have contributed to this exciting process; in particular the faculty and staff  
from universities, colleges, and provincial institutions who gave freely of  their time and expertise for 
the purpose of  preparing teachers with the knowledge, skills, and dispositions required for nurturing 
students in elementary grades. Their contributions to improving the quality of  basic education in 
Pakistan are incalculable. I would also like to thank the distinguished NCRC members, who helped 
further enrich the curricula by their recommendations. The generous support received from the 
United States Agency for International Development (USAID) enabled HEC to draw on technical 
assistance and subject-matter expertise of  the scholars at Education Development Center, Inc., and 
Teachers College, Columbia University . Together, this partnership has produced a vitally important 
resource for Pakistan.
PROF . DR SOHAIL NAQVI
Executive Director
Higher Education Commission
Islamabad

HOW THIS COURSE GUIDE W AS DEVELOPED
iii
How the Windows on Practice  
guide was developed
As part of  nationwide reforms to improve the quality of  teacher education, the 
Higher Education Commission (HEC), with technical assistance from the USAID 
Teacher Education Project, engaged faculty across the nation to develop courses 
for the new four-year B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary programme. 
The process of  designing the syllabus for each course in years 3–4 of  the 
programme began with curriculum design workshops. Faculty who will teach the 
courses were identified by university deans and directors and then invited to attend 
the workshops. The first workshop included national and international subject 
matter experts who led a seminar focused on a review and update of  subject 
(content) knowledge. The remainder of  this workshop was spent reviewing the 
HEC Scheme of  Studies, organizing course content across the semester, developing 
detailed unit descriptions, and preparing the course syllabi. Although the course 
syllabi are designed primarily for Student Teachers taking the course, they are a 
useful resource for teacher educators, too. 
Following the initial workshop, participants developed teaching notes, including 
ideas for teaching units of  study and related resources. Faculty worked individually 
or in groups, focusing on their own preparations to teach, while bearing in mind 
that their end product must also be useful to those who will teach the course in 
the future. A series of  workshops occurred over the year in order to allow faculty 
to have time for their work, engage in peer review , and receive critical feedback 
from national and/or international consultants. In designing both the syllabi and 
the teaching notes, faculty and subject matter experts were guided by the National 
Professional Standards for Teachers in Pakistan 2009. 
All of  the syllabi developed by faculty are included in this document along with a 
listing of  topical teaching notes. Additional references and resources appear at the 
end of  the document. These should provide a rich resource for faculty who will 
teach the course in the future. Sample syllabi with accompanying teaching notes 
are also included in order to provide new faculty with a model for developing 
curriculum and planning to teach. This Windows on Practice guide is not intended 
to provide a complete curriculum with a standard syllabus and fully developed 
units of  study , rather it aims to suggest ideas and resources for faculty to use in 
their own planning. Hence, readers will find sample units and materials that reflect 
the perspective of  faculty designers rather than prescriptions for practice.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
iv
We are respectful of  intellectual property rights and have not included any 
suggested materials that are copyright protected and for which we have not 
secured explicit permission to use. Therefore, all materials included may be 
used in classrooms for educational purposes. Materials in this document are 
not intended for commercial use, however. They may not be used in other 
publications without securing permission for their use.
Initial drafts were reviewed by the National Curriculum Review Committee 
(NCRC), and suggestions were incorporated into final drafts, which were then 
submitted to the NCRC for approval. 
Faculty involved in course design: Dr Bashir Hussain, Bahauddin Zakariya 
University , Multan; Ishrat Siddiqa Lodhi, Fatima Jinnah Women University , 
Rawalpindi; Dr Khalid Saleem, University of  Education, Lahore; Dr Muhammad 
Sarwar, University of  Sargodha; Naila Siddiqua, University of  Karachi; Dr Naveed 
Sultana, Allama Iqbal Open University , Islamabad; Raqeeb Imtiaz, University 
of  Gujrat; Dr Rizwan Akram Rana, University of  Punjab, Lahore; Sadruddin 
Qutoshi, Karakorum International University , Gilgit; Dr Saifullah, University of  
Gujrat, Lahore; Saima Mushtaq, Fatima Jinnah Women University , Rawalpindi; 
Saira Soomro, University of  Sindh; Samreen Jalal, University of  Education Lahore; 
Dr Shafqat Hussain, University of  Sargodha; Zahid Majeed, and Allama Iqbal 
Open University , Islamabad.
National subject experts leading the seminar: Dr Thomas Christie, Aga Khan 
University Examination Board (AKU-EB), Karachi, and Isbah Mustafa, AKU-EB, 
Karachi.
NCRC review dates: 24–25 April 2013
NCRC Reviewers: Dr Saeed Khan, University of  Haripur, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa; 
Dr Sabiha Hammid, Islamia University , Bahawalpur; and Dr Muhammad Imran, 
Arid Agriculture University , Rawalpindi.

T able of contents
1 Rationale for a course on  
 test development and evaluation .............................. 7
 Essential knowledge ...........................................................8
 Common misconceptions ........................................9
2 Course syllabi ......................................................... 10 
  Syllabus 1: Dr Bashir Hussain, Dr Muhammad Sarwar,  
  Sadruddin Qutoshi, and Saira Soomro  .............................11
  Syllabus 2: Ishrat Siddiqa Lodhi, Dr Naveed Sultana 
  Dr Rizwan Akram Rana, Samreen Jalal,  
  Saima Mushtaq, and Zahid Majeed ..................................18
3 Representative syllabus with teaching notes .......... 25 
  Syllabus: Dr Khalid Saleem, Naila Siddiqua, 
  Raqeeb Imtiaz, and Dr Saifullah  .......................................26
  T eaching notes for the syllabus .........................................32
4 Integrated teaching notes ....................................... 35 
  Introducing the course ......................................................36 
  Use of standards in testing ...............................................50 
  Characteristics of a good test ...........................................67 
  Grading and reporting .......................................................73 
  Evaluation ..........................................................................93
5 Methods and strategies to use in planning  ...........101
6 Resources .............................................................106
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
07
Rationale for a 
course on test  
development and 
evaluation
1
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
08
The Test Development and Evaluation Course is offered by the HEC as a professional 
course in year 4 of the new B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary programme to prepare Student 
Teachers for effective testing and evaluation practices in primary schools. Student 
Teachers study this course after learning about the theories related to formative and 
summative assessment in the Classroom Assessment course in year 2. 
Formative assessment has been established as one of the few pedagogical techniques 
that have a marked positive effect on classroom learning (Black and Wiliam, 2003). 
In contrast, summative tests can have harmful effects on teaching and learning 
(Mansell and the Assessment Reform Group, 2009). This course is intended to help 
teachers avoid the negative impact of summative classroom tests, which are often 
an external administrative requirement, by creating positive feedback potential so 
that tests can be used formatively. There are six key steps involved in summative 
testing: (i) the adoption of agreed standards by the teacher; (ii) the specification of 
test coverage; (iii) the framing of questions; (iv) marking according to a rubric; (v) 
analysis of test effectiveness; and (vi) performance feedback for students. These steps 
are essential in the evaluation of classroom achievement. Testing for other purposes 
makes different demands; however, these forms of testing are referenced here to help 
Student Teachers learn what not to do. 
Essential knowledge
Any observation on which a judgement is based has an element of error. Fortunately, 
error is random and does not aggregate: multiple observations repeat the true part 
of the score but not the error. Therefore, the sum of many observations of the same 
attribute is mainly true score with very little error.
Students perform better when they know on what basis they will be judged. 
Teachers should share standards with their classes.
Standards should not merely involve topic coverage, but they should include the 
kinds of understanding that should be developed. These are defined in taxonomies of 
objectives, and they are essential guides to the classification of items, questions, and 
test objectives as a whole.
Reporting raw marks to students inevitably leads to students comparing themselves 
with each other (norm referencing) on the basis of tiny differences that are wide 
open to error. Turning raw marks into grades (criterion referencing) focuses 
attention on standards of subject achievement rather than the performance of peers. 
Grades are much more inclusive than raw marks. Everyone can succeed instead of a 
few getting the top ranks and others envying in norm-referenced testing.
COURSE GUIDE: Test Development and Evaluation
09
Common misconceptions 
•	 Assessment and evaluation are interchangeable terms and may be  
 considered synonyms.
•	 Assessment is designed to put students in rank order.
•	 Test development is not a difficult task.
•	 Standard setting cannot be applied in classroom examinations.
•	 The only object of evaluation is student academic achievement.
•	 Highly reliable tests also possess high test validity.
•	 Results and statistics used in test analysis do not clarify meaning.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
10
Course syllabi 
TEST DEVELOPMENT AND  
EVALUATION
2
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
11
TEST DEVELOPMENT AND 
EVALUATION
In this section you will find two syllabi that have been written by groups of  faculty . 
Using the HEC Scheme of  Studies for the course, they considered the balance 
between demands of  the subject, active learning pedagogies, their students, and the 
particular university milieu in which they work. The syllabi all reflect the same key 
concepts and broad goals, but they vary in emphasis. 
 SYLLABUS 1
By 
Dr Bashir Hussain, Dr Muhammad Sarwar, Sadruddin Qutoshi,  
and Saira Soomro 
Year, semester
Year 4, semester 8
Credit value
3 credits 
Prerequisite
Successful completion of the Classroom Assessment course
Course description
The Test Development and Evaluation course will focus on knowledge, 
understanding, and skills in the development of  valid, reliable, and adequate tests and 
evaluation procedures as a means to improve learning. Major topics covered include 
theories of  test development, characteristics of  a good test, steps in test construction, 
alternative assessment strategies, and evaluation and accountability based on value 
addition. Assessment methods include written tests, assignments, presentations, 
observation, peer assessment and self-assessment, and portfolios. At the end of  the 
course Student Teachers will be able to plan, organize, develop, administer, and score 
tests, report student performance, and utilize results to improve student learning. 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
12
Course outcomes
After studying the course, Student Teachers will be able to:
•	 describe and explain types of  tests including their advantages and limitations
•	 differentiate and apply Bloom’s and Structure of  Observed Learning Outcomes 
  (SOLO) taxonomies for test construction 
•	 describe the role of  classical, item response, and generalizability theory in  
 test development
•	 explain the characteristics of  an effective test
•	 construct tests systematically 
•	 use a variety of  essential assessment strategies 
•	 describe and use evaluation to improve learning, teacher performance, and  
 school performance based on value added. 
Learning and teaching approaches
There will be a variety of learning and teaching approaches, such as interactive lec -
tures, classroom discussions, presentations, and role play. To equip Student Teachers 
with testing and evaluation skills, there will be practical exercises in test construc -
tion, administration, and analysis. Peer teaching should be used regularly. Active 
learning strategies, including pair and group work, should also be used regularly.
Instructors and Student Teachers should integrate this course with other courses, 
including thesis or project work; adapt the course to personal interests, knowledge, 
experiences, and responsibilities; and design and engage in assignments with sufficient 
depth and breadth to be useful in other courses and their teaching career.
Student Teachers are expected to explore and apply educational software and other 
test development and evaluation resources while engaging in a critical examination of  
educational issues related to testing, assessment, and evaluation. 
Unit outlines
Unit 1: Introduction to testing (2 weeks)
This unit aims to provide Student Teachers with an understanding of  the term testing 
and its meaning in the context of  teaching and learning. Student Teachers will get an 
overview of  testing, different kinds of  tests, advantages of  testing, and its limitations. 
The unit will also cover teacher-made tests and standardized tests and how they 
support teaching and learning. Student Teachers will discuss and analyse the objectives 
of  test development, evaluation, and the implication of  evaluation for learners and 
teachers based on both Bloom’s and SOLO taxonomies.
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
13
Unit outcomes
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to:
 l describe the concept of  testing 
 l explain various types of  tests, including their advantages and limitations
 l recognize domains of  Bloom’s Taxonomy in individual questions and items 
 l explain the use of  SOLO Taxonomy for testing.
Unit content
•	 Concepts of  testing
•	 Testing
•	 Kinds of  tests
•	 Teacher-made tests
•	 Standardized tests
•	 Benefits and limitations of  tests
•	 Concept of  taxonomy in testing 
•	 Using Bloom’s Taxonomy in test development
•	 Using SOLO Taxonomy in test development
Unit 2: Characteristics of a good test (2 weeks)
This unit focuses on the characteristics of  a ‘good test’ and outlines its essential 
elements. It aims to help Student Teachers develop skills in design, trial, moderation, 
and validation of  testing instruments for a range of  purposes, including formative 
and summative assessment and self-assessment. The unit also covers validity and 
authenticity , reliability , objectivity , adequacy , and differentiability . Components of  
this unit relate the issues of  testing with Student Teachers’ examination experiences. 
This unit is largely practice-based, so in addition to reading texts on testing, Student 
Teachers will regularly write and participate in classroom discussion. 
Unit outcomes
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to:
 l explain the characteristics of  a good test
 l describe and calculate various types of  reliability
 l ensure validity and adequacy in test construction
 l evaluate test items on the basis of  their discrimination
 l describe the comparability and utility of  a test.
Unit content
•	 Concept of  a good test
•	 Reliability of  tests
•	 Practice session to calculate reliability of  tests
•	 Validity of  tests
•	 Evaluating test items based on their discrimination power
•	 Utility of  a test
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
14
Unit 3: Steps of test construction (4 weeks) 
This unit focuses on various steps involved in test construction such as planning and 
organizing the test development process, specification of  the test form and procedure, 
and item analysis. The unit also examines rationales for test development such as 
specification of  learners, learning situation, and test type (e.g. summative, formative, 
and placement). Student Teachers will develop, administer, and score a test based on 
specifications and will provide descriptive statistics on test reliability and item analysis. 
Components of  this unit relate the issues of  testing to the examination experience of  
Student Teachers. This unit is largely practice-based. 
Unit outcomes
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to:
 l ensure content validity (course coverage, concept coverage, learning outcomes 
  coverage) by using a table of  specifications 
 l apply various steps involved in test construction, including constructing tables of 
  specifications based on Bloom’s Taxonomy and on SOLO Taxonomy
 l construct multiple-choice questions (MCQs) and identify the elements of  the  
 questions (i.e. stem, key , and distractors)
 l perform item analysis (difficulty , discrimination, fairness)
 l score tests while minimizing probable biases
 l construct and mark short answer questions
 l develop model answers and create marking schemes for essay questions.
Unit content
•	 Determining the behaviours to be assessed 
•	 Planning the test
•	 Ensuring content validity (course coverage, concept coverage, learning 
  outcomes coverage) through a table of  specifications
•	 Constructing a table of  specifications based on Bloom’s Taxonomy
•	 Constructing a table of  specifications based on SOLO Taxonomy
•	 Writing good MCQs, and constructing tests with MCQs based on a table  
 of  specifications
•	 Reviewing peer’s tests and scores 
•	 Performing item analysis (difficulty , discrimination, fairness)
•	 Constructing short answer questions
¡¡  Marking guides for short answer questions 
•	 Constructing essay questions and tests 
¡¡  Developing model answers and marking schemes for essay questions
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
15
Unit 4: Essential assessment strategies (5 weeks)
This unit describes the purpose of  assessment in teaching the social sciences, how 
to design rubrics for assessment, and how to align grading policies for summative 
assessments with the syllabus. This unit also provides guidance on assessing student 
activities, assignments, and projects, as well as on some innovative methods of  
assessment. It also will prepare Student Teachers for examinations according to new 
assessment policies used by the four-year B.Ed. (Hons) Elementary programme in 
Pakistan.
Unit outcomes 
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to:
 l explain a variety of  essential assessment strategies
 l use rubrics to assess students’ work (e.g. performance, assignments,  
 and presentations)
 l use peer assessment in a complementary way
 l describe computer-assisted testing 
 l use interviews as a tool for assessment.
Unit content
•	 Classroom observations
¡¡ What is the purpose of  classroom observation?
¡¡ Planning and preparing for observation
¡¡ Typical observation formats 
¡¡ Deriving results from the observation by developing rubrics
•	 Assignments and presentations
¡¡ Your intended audience
¡¡ Format, structure, and submission requirements
¡¡ Grading criteria
•	 Projects
¡¡ Definition of  a project
¡¡ Tasks versus tests
¡¡ Five features of  a project
¡¡ What makes a project successful?
¡¡ Phases of  a project
¡¡ How to assess projects and use them for evaluation 
¡¡ Double marking, interrater reliability , and the Spearman–Brown  
 prophecy formula 
•	 Oral questioning
¡¡ Purpose of  questioning (e.g. feedback for improving teaching and learning)
¡¡ Guidelines for questioning 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
16
•	 Peer appraisal
¡¡ ‘Guess who’ techniques
¡¡ Socio-metric techniques
•	 Interview strengths and weaknesses
¡¡ Interview format
•	 Portfolio assessment
¡¡ Two types of  portfolios (increasing breadth, increasing depth)
¡¡ Steps in the portfolio assessment process
•	 Computer-assisted testing and the generation of  parallel forms for the  
 measurement of  change
Unit 5: Evaluation and accountability based on value 
addition (3 weeks)
This unit will provide some orientation to Student Teachers about evaluating learning, 
textbooks, and material with rubrics. This unit emphasizes the use of  assessment and 
value-added results for teachers, textbooks, and course evaluation. Moreover, this unit 
focuses on supporting Student Teachers’ role in school accountability . 
Unit outcomes 
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to:
 l explain the concept of  evaluation 
 l use assessment and value-added results for evaluation 
 l understand how teachers are evaluated on the basis of  student performance
 l compare teachers based on value-added results in terms of  student learning. 
Unit content
•	 Concept of  evaluation
¡¡ Using evaluation for different purposes, including teacher and  
 student evaluations
•	 Accountability and evaluation
•	 Teacher accountability
•	 Textbook evaluation
¡¡ Concept of  textbook evaluation
¡¡ How to evaluate a textbook
¡¡ What are the basic things to consider in textbook evaluation?
•	 Concept of  course evaluation
¡¡ How and why to evaluate a course 
•	 Designing tools for evaluating teachers, courses, and textbooks
•	 Review of  concepts relating to tests, testing, and evaluation 
•	 Review of  the theories of  test construction
•	 Review of  concepts relating to evaluation 
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
17
Grading policy
There are three assessable components in this course.
Mode of  assessment Percentage
Assignments 45%
Midterm exam 25%
Final exam 30%
Assignments may include the following activities: 
•	 critical reflections on readings 
•	 independent learning relating to role of  test development and evaluation 
•	 group and individual presentations 
•	 role play and demonstration of  technology use 
•	 group tasks 
•	 classroom participation and attendance.
The midterm and final examinations will both be 1.5 hours long and include multiple-
choice, short answer, and essay questions. The midterm will cover the first seven 
weeks, and the final exam will cover the remaining weeks.
Rubrics will be developed in class to assess each assignment.
Recommended reading
Cohen, R., & Swerdlik, M. (2009).	Psychological	testing	and	assessment:	An	introduction	to	
tests	and	measurement (7th ed.). Columbus, OH: McGraw-Hill.
Gardner, J. (2006). Assessment	and	learning. Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Publications.
Kline, T . J. B. (2005). Classical test theory: Assumptions, equations, limitations, and 
item analyses. In T . J. B. Kline (Ed.),	Psychological	testing:	A	practical	approach	to	design	
and	evaluation (pp. 91–106). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. Available from:
 Ø http://www .sagepub.com/upm-data/4869_Kline_Chapter_5_Classical_Test_ 
 Theory .pdf
Zeng, J., & Wyse, A. (2009).	Introduction	to	classical	test	theory. Lansing, MI: Michigan 
Department of  Education. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://michigan.gov/documents/mde/3_Classical_Test_Theory_293437_7.pdf
Miller, M., Linn, R,. & Gronlund, N. (2009). Measurement	and	assessment	in	teaching	
(10th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
18
SYLLABUS 2
By 
Ishrat Siddiqa Lodhi, Dr Naveed Sultana, Dr Rizwan Akram Rana, 
Samreen Jalal, Saima Mushtaq, and Zahid Majeed 
Year, semester
Year 4, semester 8
Credit value
3 credits 
Prerequisite
Successful completion of the Classroom Assessment course
Course description
Awareness of  test development, measurement, and evaluation principles and 
procedures is essential for teachers to monitor students’ academic progress. This 
course is designed for Student Teachers to enhance their level of  knowledge, 
understanding, and practical skills in testing and evaluation. It mainly deals with test 
development, standard setting, evaluation strategies, grading, and reporting. This 
course also aims to integrate and implement theory and practice to strengthen the 
fundamentals of  measurement and assessment learned in the Classroom Assessment 
course. After completing this course, Student Teachers will be in a position to apply 
the methodology of  test development and evaluation in the classroom. 
Course outcomes
By the end of  the course, Student Teachers will be able to: 
•	 understand the key concepts, methods, and paradigms of  test development  
 and e valuation
•	 apply the key concepts, methods and paradigms of  test development and 
  e valuation
•	 develop, assemble, administer, score, and analyse appropriate tests to interpret 
  and pro vide feedback on students’ progress
•	 provide balanced assessment aligned with standards and outcomes to  
 impro ve the teaching-learning process
•	 apply peer evaluation and self-evaluation tools and techniques (e.g. portfolio 
  assessment, e xpert evaluation) for feedback purposes
•	 identify emerging trends in test development and evaluation for future 
 implementation.
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
19
Learning and teaching approaches
T eaching approaches
•	 Lecture and discussion
•	 Brainstorming
•	 Self-directed learning and self-study 
•	 Group-based learning (e.g. cooperative learning)
•	 Literature reviews
Learning tools
•	 Homework assignments and projects
•	 Field work, including data collection and analysis 
•	 Maintaining a log or journal
Unit 1: T est development (3 weeks)
A key goal of  test development is to create a valid measure of  standard-referenced 
student performance. For this purpose, Student Teachers must know the theoretical 
principles, issues, and required decisions to develop tests for different purposes. 
This unit is comprised of  three parts: introducing key terms such as testing and 
measurement, skills and tools required for test development, and assessment of  test 
tools’ credibility . 
This unit elaborates on the steps involved in test development. It includes 
performance assessment, which measures what students can do rather than how 
much they know , as well as related tasks, which are based on what is most essential in 
the curriculum and what is interesting to students. 
Finally , this unit covers the development of  tools and determining the right way to 
collect data. For example, when designing evaluation tools and selecting evaluation 
methods, Student Teachers should consider the cultural contexts of  the communities 
in which programmes operate. Overall, this unit aims to impart on Student Teachers 
the fundamental information, skills, and disposition that will allow them to manage 
assessment and evaluation programmes at the desired level.
Unit outcomes
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to:
 l define test, measurement,	assessment,	and	evaluation
 l understand the purpose, principles, and scope of  test and evaluation
 l describe the concept and process of  test development
 l comprehend the theory and practice of  norm- and criterion-referenced tests
 l recognize the role of  performance assessment in enhancing the quality of   
 the teaching-learning process
 l understand the importance of  measuring students’ interest, attitude, and  
 creative thinking abilities 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
20
 l demonstrate a high level of  competence in developing and administering  
 different, context-specific evaluation tools 
 l reduce unnecessary complexity in test items
 l overcome language barriers that can threaten the validity of  content-based 
  assessment.
Unit content
•	 Overview of  the meaning of  test,	testing,	measurement,	assessment,		
	 and	evaluation
•	 Test development process
•	 Common issues in test development (e.g. language of  test, readability , feedback)
•	 Performance assessment of  students
•	 Developing assessment tools (e.g. rubrics, rating scale, checklist) 
•	 Test administration
•	 Item analysis
Unit 2: Psychometric properties of 
formative and summative assessment  
(2 weeks)
This unit discusses emerging trends in formative and summative assessment. The first 
section of  this unit examines formative and summative assessment as assessments of 
learning and assessments for learning. 
The second section looks at essential psychometric techniques that provide useful 
information for the improvement of  student learning and assessment procedures. This 
unit also focuses on improving Student Teachers’ competence in classroom assessment 
in order to yield accurate information about student achievement. It also aims to 
develop Student Teachers’ ability to use the classroom assessment process and its 
results to enhance learning. Finally , Student Teachers will be provided opportunities to 
engage in hands-on activities. 
Unit outcomes
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to:
 l describe the different purposes of  formative and summative assessments
 l explain formative assessment as a process 
 l explain summative assessment as a product of  learning
 l describe the concepts of  validity and reliability
 l understand evidence of  validity and reliability
 l explain the threats to the validity of  formative and summative assessment
 l explain the threats to the reliability of  formative and summative assessment.
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
21
Unit content
•	 Relationship between formative and summative assessment
•	 Test validity
•	 Test reliability
•	 Types of  reliability 
Unit 3: Grading and reporting (3 weeks)
Statistics play a vital role in our daily educational lives. From time to time, a teacher 
has to collect, organize, and analyse data in order to make decisions about the 
teaching-learning process. This unit will provide information about basic descriptive 
statistics (measures of  central tendency and measures of  variability) so that the 
Student Teachers can analyse measurements and present conclusions. It aims to help 
Student Teachers understand the functions of  grading and different types of  grading 
procedures. This unit will enable Student Teachers to assign grades to students by 
using the most effective grading practices, criteria, and standards to provide accurate, 
specific, and timely feedback that can help improve student performance. Additionally , 
this unit will offer hands-on experience in interpreting test scores and reporting 
student performance. 
Unit outcomes
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to:
 l recognize the basic symbols of  elementary statistics
 l compute measures of  central tendency and variability
 l analyse the results of  measurements 
 l comprehend the function, types, and uses of  grades
 l apply principles and strategies and establish criteria to make grading efficient, 
  consistent, and fair
 l communicate learning expectations to students by establishing grading 
  standards
 l interpret test results with necessary caution and describe problems in grading.
Unit content
•	 Elementary statistics
•	 Effective grading in the classroom
•	 Establishing criteria and standards for grading 
•	 Interpreting test scores
•	 Reporting assessment results to students, teachers, parents, and school 
  administration
•	 Problems in grading and reporting
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
22
Unit 4: Curriculum and test development 
(3 weeks)
This unit is focused on the relationship between curriculum and test development. In 
this unit, Student Teachers will develop an understanding of  how learning outcomes 
are used to create achievement tests. It also provides an overview of  the National 
Professional Standards for Teachers of  Pakistan with special reference to Standard-05, 
which is based on assessment and curriculum. This unit will examine the role of  
curriculum in test development and assessment, and discuss the role of  teacher’s 
expectations of  students’ performance. It will also throw light on how a teacher 
can give feedback directly related to student performance that supports, rather than 
hinders, student potential. 
Unit outcomes
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to:
 l understand the relationship between curriculum and the process of  test 
  development
 l analyse the best strategies for sharing and communicating assessment results
 l communicate positive expectations to their students effectively .
Unit content
•	 Norm-referenced and criterion-referenced tests
•	 Linking curriculum with test development
•	 Communicating and sharing standards (National Professional Standards for 
  Teachers and National Curriculum 2006)
•	 Effect of  teacher expectations on student achievement
Unit 5: Outcomes of assessment results 
(3 weeks)
This unit aims to enable Student Teachers to assess student progress by improving 
teaching and learning. There are a number of  formats, tools, and methods available 
to assess student progress, but in Pakistan, teachers are bound to follow the format 
provided by the provincial Directorate of  Education. This unit will provide a taste of  
other formats to which adaptations can be made to better suit the local educational 
context. Assessment results are not only important for students and teachers but also 
for school effectiveness, improvement, and development. The overall focus of  the unit 
is to train Student Teachers to assess students’ progress, develop students’ portfolios, 
make decisions in terms of  instructional purposes, and use assessment results for 
school effectiveness and improvement.
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
23
Unit outcomes
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to:
 l understand the concept of  student progress
 l develop student portfolios and evaluate them
 l make instructional decisions by assessing student progress 
 l apply instructional decisions for effectiveness and school improvement.
Unit content
•	 Student progress
•	 Decision-making for instructional purposes 
•	 School effectiveness and classroom improvement
Unit 6: Emerging trends (2 weeks)
This unit covers emerging assessment techniques, models, and approaches that will 
enhance Student Teachers’ understanding of  assessment in the current educational 
climate. Self-assessment and peer assessment are new trends in educational 
assessment. International assessments, including the Trends in International 
Mathematics and Science Study (TIMMS) and the Programme for International 
Student Assessment (PISA), and national assessments, such as the National Education 
Assessment System (NEAS) and the Annual Status of  Education Report (ASER), are 
different from classroom tests and school examinations. The information is aimed to 
equip Student Teachers with the knowledge, understanding, and skills to adapt some 
emerging trends in assessment for their future primary school classes.
Unit outcomes
After completing this unit, Student Teachers will be able to:
 l predict their position relative to their past learning
 l predict their relative position with respect to their peers
 l differentiate between self-assessment and peer assessment
 l compare and contrast assessments by international and national assessment  
 agencies.
Unit content
•	 Measuring student growth
•	 Self-assessment, peer assessment, and reducing the burden on teachers 
•	 International and national assessment agencies – NEAS, AKU-EB, and Federal 
  Board of  Intermediate and Secondary Education (FBISE)
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
24
Course assignments
Suggested course assignments involve the development and administration of  test 
items with subsequent item analysis and report preparation. Student Teachers will 
also be asked to develop a portfolio.
Grading policy
The grading policy depends upon the individual university . For example, the 
University of  the Punjab, Lahore, follows the following pattern for its four-year 
undergraduate programmes:
Mode of assessment Percentage
Assignments 25%
Midterm exam 35%
Final exam 40%
Recommended books
Alastair, I. (2007). Enhancing	learning	through	formative	assessment	and	feedback.	London: 
Routledge.
Banks, R. S. (2005).	Classroom	assessment:	Issues	and	practices. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson Education.
Black, P ., Harrison, C., Marshell, B., & Wiliam, D. (2003). Assessment	for	learning:	
Putting	it	into	practice. Milton Keynes, UK: Open University Press.
Ebel, R. L., & Frisbie, D.A. (1991). Essentials	of 	educational	measurement. New Delhi: 
Prentice Hall of  India.
 
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
25
Representative 
syllabi with 
teaching notes
3
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
26
This section contains an example syllabus with accompanying teaching notes. The 
teaching notes have been integrated around broad themes addressed in the course 
(test development, reporting, and evaluation) and offer opportunities for hands-on 
practice to prepare Student Teachers for effective testing and evaluation in their 
careers. Faculty who are teaching the course for the first time or who are interested 
in the process of  curriculum design may find it useful to see how the authors of  this 
representative syllabus chose to develop particular ideas and themes in their notes. 
Ideas presented in teaching notes here are not duplicated in the later section where 
integrated themes may be found. 
SYLLABUS
By
Dr Khalid Saleem, Naila Siddiqua, Raqeeb Imtiaz, and Dr Saifullah 
Year, semester
Year 4, semester 8
Credit value
3 credits 
Prerequisite
Successful completion of the Classroom Assessment course
Course description
The present course covers test development and evaluation at the B.Ed. (Hons) level. 
This course will enable Student Teachers to select assessment standards relevant to the 
content area they are teaching from the National Curriculum 2006 and the National 
Professional Standards for Teachers. It will also provide hands-on activities to help 
Student Teachers become proficient in test development and reporting. This course 
will also focus on item analysis, standardized test development, and basic statistical 
techniques for judging a test’s reliability and validity . Student Teachers will have 
the opportunity to examine different perspectives on student, teacher, and textbook 
evaluation.
The pedagogy for this course will include interactivity , hands-on work in different 
content areas, skill-based and performance-oriented activities, presentations, 
observation, and practicums involving the main stages of  test development and 
interpretation.
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
27
Course outcomes
After completing this course, Student Teachers will be able to:
•	 develop student achievement tests
•	 comprehend and apply standard-setting techniques
•	 apply taxonomies of  educational objectives in test development and assessment
•	 analyse test items, including item difficulty level and discrimination
•	 apply basic statistics for reporting test results
•	 convert raw scores into standard scores. 
Learning and teaching approaches
•	 Lectures followed by discussion using learner-centred methods
•	 Cooperative learning
•	 Assignments involving practical tasks in test construction and analysis
•	 Quizzes 
•	 Projects using learner-centred or do-it-yourself  methods
Unit outlines
Unit 1: T est development process (3 weeks)
This unit sets out the test development process’s conceptual framework within the 
context of  the National Curriculum. It presents information on tables of  specification 
as well as item and test forms. It also discusses instructions to examinees, answer keys 
and rubrics, and examination and feedback report. 
Unit outcomes
At the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will be able to:
 l understand the test development process
 l apply taxonomies of  educational objectives in test evaluation
 l construct items, test forms, examination reports, and other tools used in  
 test development.
Unit content
•	 Concept of  test
•	 Defining test objectives 
•	 Designing tables of  specification
•	 Constructing test items
•	 Test form development
•	 Test conduct
•	 Marking and result compilation
•	 Writing the examination report
•	 Writing the feedback report
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
28
Unit 2: Concept of standard setting (3 weeks)
This unit focuses on standards as a concept as well the different types of  standards 
and how they are set. In particular, two methods of  setting performance standards are 
examined: item-centred and examinee-centred methods. 
Unit outcomes
At the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l define the concept of  standards in educational and testing contexts
 l differentiate between content- and performance-based standards
 l identify the need for standard setting in assessment
 l comprehend and apply standard-setting methods in the assessment process.
Unit content
•	 Use of  standards in education
•	 Use of  standards in testing
¡¡ Need for standard setting
¡¡ Content-based standard setting
¡¡ Performance-based standard setting 
•	 Methods of  setting performance standards
¡¡ Item-centred methods
¡¡ Examinee-centred methods
Unit 3: Interpreting testing and evaluation scores  
using statistics (4 weeks)
This unit discusses the role of  statistics in assessment and evaluation. Student 
Teachers will learn to summarize data, relate it to the population, and present data 
using different graphs. This unit explores the sources of  variation and the relationship 
between two variables. It also analyses tests with respect to reliability and validity . 
Unit outcomes
At the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l recognize the role of  statistics in assessment and evaluation
 l display data graphically
 l understand the central tendency and variation in data
 l measure the relationship between two variables
 l comprehend the relationship between reliability and validity .
Unit content
•	 Introduction to statistics
•	 Frequency distribution
•	 Types of  graphs
•	 Measures of  central tendency
•	 Measures of  dispersion
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
29
•	 Measures of  relationship
•	 Item analysis
¡¡ Ensuring reliability and validity
Unit 4: Reporting the results of standardized tests  
(4 weeks)
This unit enables Student Teachers to interpret commonly reported scores such as 
percentile ranks, percentile band scores, standard scores, and grade equivalents.
Unit outcomes
At the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l understand the different frames of  reference to interpret scores
 l comprehend different types of  standardized scores
 l transform scores from one scale to another
 l examine and interpret published norms.
Unit content
•	 Methods of  interpreting test scores
¡¡ Criterion-referenced interpretations
¡¡ Norm-referenced interpretations 
•	 Grade equivalent scores
¡¡ Percentile rank
¡¡ Stanines
¡¡ Calculating standard scores
•	 Standard scores
¡¡ z-score
¡¡ T-score
•	 Normalized scores
¡¡ Calculating normalized scores
•	 Criteria for judging norms
•	 Cautions in interpreting transformed test scores
Unit 5: Evaluation context (2 weeks)
This unit focuses the three basic elements of  the educational process: students, 
teachers, and textbooks. It aims to help Student Teachers understand the different 
parameters used to evaluate teaching-learning skills and competencies. It also 
examines the various components of  a textbook and how to judge a textbook’s 
quality . Student Teachers will have the opportunity to perform a hands-on activity 
using different tools for evaluation.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
30
Unit outcomes
At the end of  this unit, Student Teachers will be able to do the following:
 l understand the differences in evaluating different elements of  a school  
 (e.g. teachers, student learning, textbooks, and school environment)
 l identify indicators to evaluate different elements of  school 
 l apply different tools and checklists for evaluation.
Unit content
•	 Student evaluation
•	 Teacher evaluation
•	 Textbook evaluation
•	 Project work involving tools of  evaluation
Course assignments
This course contains two assignments.
Developing an achievement test
Student Teachers will maintain a file containing a table of  specification, items 
developed and a related mark scheme and item classification table, a first draft of  a test 
with comments from peers, a printed copy of  the test form, a compiled result sheet 
from one class, and two reports. It is recommended that this assignment accounts for 
20 per cent of  the class mark. 
Performance standard-setting exercise 
Student Teachers will complete a report on performance standard-setting exercise they 
conducted. The report will include the procedure adopted and recommendations for 
a method of  setting performance standards. It is recommended that this assignment 
accounts for 10 per cent of  the class mark.
Grading policy
A variety of  assessments will be used in the course, including midterm and final 
examinations as per relevant university rules. 
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
31
Recommended resources
6 misconceptions about standardized tests (2012). Retrieved from: 
 Ø http://www .minglebox.com/article/ 
 sat-exam/6-misconceptions-about-standardized-tests
Ebel, R. B., & Frisbie, D. A. (1991). Essentials	of 	educational	measurement (5th ed.). 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Haladyna, T . M. (1999). Developing	and	validating	multiple	choice	test	items (2nd ed.). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erbaum.
Roid, G. H., & Haladyna, T . H. (1982).	A	technology	of 	test	item	writing. London: 
Academic Press, Inc.
Shrock, S. A., & Coscarelli, W . C. (2007). Criterion-referenced	test	development (3rd ed.). 
San Francisco: Pfeiffer.
Van der Linden, W . J. (2003). Linear	models	for	optimal	test	design:	Statistics	for	social	
science	and	behavioural	sciences. New York City: Springer.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
32
TEACHING NOTES
Unit 4: Reporting the results of 
standardized tests (4 weeks)
Developed by Naila Siddiqua 
Methods of interpreting test scores
Criterion-referenced interpretations
Student Teachers will think, pair, share to explore the advantages and disadvantages of  
relating classroom scores to national standards.
Norm-referenced interpretations
Student Teachers will conduct a three-step interview to explore the ranking of  
students in a class and who benefits. 
Grade equivalent scores
Student Teachers will engage in data calculations to compare results.
Percentile 
A percentile (or a centile) is a measure used in statistics indicating the value below 
which a given percentage of  observations in a group of  observations fall. For example, 
the 20th percentile is the score below which 20 percent of  the scores may be found; if  
a score is in the 86th percentile, it is higher than 86% of  the other scores. 
Stanines
Percentile scores have the disadvantage that they can give a false impression of  test 
accuracy . If  there are more than 100 testees, we may see every reported percentile 
from 0 to 99 on a test that has only 50 marks. Stanines get round this difficulty by 
reporting just nine outcomes – hence, the name standard	nine. Stanines consider the 
testee’s position in the rank order, but the rank order is related to the normal curve. 
The following website provides more information about stanines: 
 Ø http://assessment.tki.org.nz/Using-evidence-for-learning/Concepts/Concept/ 
 Percentages-percentiles-and-stanines
Calculating standard scores
Standard scores are based on the standard deviation. A standard score compares a 
testee’s score to the average score by reporting how many standard deviations separate 
the testee’s score from the mean average. A z-score is the difference between the score 
and the mean, divided by the standard deviation. z-scores almost always fractions 
that vary between +3.0 and –3.0, so they are not well suited for reports intended for 
parents or anyone else who is not familiar with statistics. An alternative is the T-score, 
which converts the observed mean score to 50 and the observed standard deviation 
to 10, resulting in a reported score range between 20 and 80. If  you plot a distribution 
graphically , it will usually have more observations towards the middle score and fewer 
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
33
at the extremes. However, it can be symmetrical, with high scores bunched and low 
scores spread out. This bunching reduces scores’ correlation with any other variable 
that does not have the same distribution. As such, when the relationships between 
scores on different tests are of  interest, the scores can be normalized (i.e. given the 
same normal distribution). Raw scores are ranked and turned into percentiles. An 
equivalent z-score is read off  a table of  the area under the normal curve without any 
further calculation.
Standard scores
Student Teachers will engage in data entry and calculation to compare the results. This 
comparison will be made by converting raw scores into standardized scores. Student 
Teachers can use the data available at http://www .udel.edu/educ/gottfredson/451/
Glutting-guide.htm
z-score
Student Teachers will engage in calculations to convert raw scores into standardized 
scores.
T -scores
Student Teachers will engage in calculations to convert raw scores into standardized 
scores.
Normalized scores
Student Teachers will engage in calculations to convert raw scores into normalized 
scores.
Unit 5: Evaluation context 
Suggestions for Student T eacher evaluation
Student Teachers will keep a reflective journal for three weeks in which they consider 
how their performance in the course is developing. They will then compare notes. 
What have they learned? Are they all learning at the same rate? How fast should they 
be learning?
Student Teachers will research tools to evaluate students. They will create a 
presentation (e.g. PowerPoint presentation) that covers at least three tools, such as 
observation, checklist, rating scale, and anecdotal records.
Based on their research, Student Teachers will then develop tools for student 
evaluation. For example, they could develop a checklist.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
34
Suggestions for teacher evaluations
Have Student Teachers work to define teacher effectiveness. Have them engage in a 
think, pair, share to identify the criteria for teacher effectiveness. Consider providing 
them with ‘Teacher evaluation’ (or the ‘Design standards’ section), available from:
 Ø http://tntp.org/assets/documents/Teacher-Evaluation-Oct10F .pdf ?files/Teacher
Have Student Teachers investigate methods for teacher evaluation. Ask them to read 
and discuss articles on principles and models of  effective teaching. Potential reading 
material includes the following:
•	 Guidelines for evaluating teaching: 
 Ø http://www .crlt.umich.edu/tstrategies/guidelines
•	 Principles of  effective teaching and examples of  descriptors: 
 Ø http://www .brookline.k12.ma.us/index. 
 php?option=com_docman&task=doc_download&gid=147
Tools for teacher evaluation: Ask Student Teachers to modify the teacher evaluation 
tools to fit with local expectations.
Ask Student Teachers to develop a teacher evaluation checklist for different subjects.
As homework, Student Teachers will write a paragraph about a method they believe 
is suitable for teacher evaluation. They should explain why they think this method is 
appropriate.
Student Teachers should try to use the checklist they developed and/or the method 
they selected at a practicum school. They can then present their findings and 
reflections on using the checklist or other method in seminar.
 
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
35
Integrated 
teaching notes
4
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
36
During the curriculum development process, contributing faculty were encouraged 
to keep notes that would be useful to others who may teach this course in the future. 
These were submitted along with the course syllabi. Teaching notes include ways to 
introduce the course, ideas for teaching units and sessions, sample lessons plans, and 
suggestions for reading and resource material. These have been integrated into a single 
section of  this document to create a rich and varied collection of  ideas that is easily 
accessible to others. Except in cases where there is duplication of  ideas, faculty are 
credited for their contribution. 
INTRODUCING THE COURSE
Introducing tests as a concept
Developed by Isbah Mustafa 
Introduction
Ask Student Teachers the following questions to gauge their experience with and 
knowledge of  tests:
•	 Which tool did this institution use to decide your admission to the B.Ed.  
 (Hons) Elementary pro gramme? What tool was used to determine whether 
  you successfully completed a semester or year? 
•	 What are the characteristics of  a test? 
Key words
•	 Test
•	 History of  testing in education
•	 Test objectives
•	 Table of  specification
•	 Test items
•	 Test forms
•	 Test conduct 
•	 Marking
•	 Examination report
•	 Feedback report
HOW THIS COURSE GUIDE W AS DEVELOPED
37
As Student Teachers respond to the questions, make sure that the following points 
are made:
•	 Tests are one of  the most commonly used assessment tools to evaluate a 
  learner’s prior knowledge and skills in a specific field.
•	 A test is a collection of  questions, items, and problems designed to determine 
  a testee’s knowledge, comprehension, or ability . 
History of testing in education 
Use the ‘Brief  history of  testing in education’ handout to introduce the history of  
tests in education. Imperial examinations and the Stanford–Binet test represent major 
developments in educational testing. Introduce these developments and then discuss 
tests used in Pakistan in the field of  education, such as certificate examinations, 
diagnostic tests by NEAS and Provincial Education Assessment System (PEAS), 
and university admission tests. These tests are used for different purposes such as 
selection, promotion, placement, and aptitude identification. 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
38
Handout
Brief history of testing in education
The imperial examination
This examination is considered to be the first selection test. It was used in Imperial 
China to select young officers for state’s bureaucracy . It dates to the Sui Dynasty 
(581–618). Before this test, the selection of  bureaucrats was made through personal 
references. This first objective tool for selection on merit had two defining features: 
it was timed (24 hours) and it had set questions that were given to all candidates. 
However, its scope was limited in terms of  the variety of  skills and content knowledge 
to be tested. Nevertheless, the test offered a way to objectively screen youth for high 
posts and entry into the elite class.
Until the 19th century , educational achievement was assessed only in universities, but 
this changed with the emergence of  the movement for mass/compulsory education 
and the introduction of  school accountability . In 1863 in England, a public finance 
system, ‘payment by results’, was introduced that made national funding of  individual 
schools dependent in part on student performance on standard examinations, usually 
oral questioning by visiting school inspectors. The system collapsed in 1890; the 
increased number of  schools and teacher unionization made the system cumbersome 
and generated bureaucratic paperwork.
A performance standard
The examination standards used in Imperial China and 19th-century England were 
combined in the US Army Aptitude tests, Alpha and Beta, which were the first 
vocational aptitude tests designed for large-scale group administration. They used all 
multiple-choice items, and the Beta version was the first non-verbal test that allowed 
speakers of  languages other than English to be fairly assessed.
Binet–Simon intelligence test 
Alfred Binet and Théodore Simon developed the first successful intelligence test in 
1905. This one-to-one test was meant to identify students requiring more input in 
French schools. Based on student performance, the test reported testees’ performance 
relative to their age. Thus, the Binet–Simon intelligence test was born.
Stanford–Binet intelligence test
The Stanford–Binet intelligence test is a modified version of  the Binet–Simon 
intelligence test. This test is widely used to measure intelligence quotient (IQ) 
rather than mental age. It uses a scale ranging from below 20 to above 145 to 
reflect the testee’s gauged intelligence. It was first presented in 1916 and has been 
revised since, most recently in 2003. The Stanford–Binet test is currently used for 
neuropsychological and career assessment, placement, compensation evaluations, 
forensics, and aptitude. 
S
COURSE GUIDE: Test Development and Evaluation
39
Current test practices in Pakistan
Have Student Teachers work in groups of  four to six. Ask each group to identify a 
type of  test that most of  the members have come across in their academic careers 
(e.g. promotion tests, aptitude tests, or selection tests). Alternatively , they could 
reflect on the test they developed in the Classroom Assessment course in semester 4. 
The group should discuss the following features of  the test:
•	 what it intended to measure
•	 what it actually measured
•	 test structure including length, maximum marks, and question types
•	 the test’s development procedure including the steps, timeline, number of   
 people involved in the procedure, their expertise, and effort required form the 
  testee.
Each group will present a summary of  their discussion to the class. 
Closing
Summarize the group presentations by listing the tests and finding commonalities, if  
any , with the imperial examination, Binet–Simon test, or Stanford–Binet test. 
References
Imperial examination. (n.d.). Retrieved 27 June 2013 from: 
 Ø http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Imperial_examination
Stanford–Binet intelligence scales (n.d.). Retrieved 27 June 2013 from: 
 Ø http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stanford%E2%80%93Binet_Intelligence_Scales 
Worsfold, A. (n.d.). A history of  school examinations. Retrieved from: 
 Ø http://www .change.freeuk.com/learning/howteach/exams.html
Defining test objectives 
Developed by Isbah Mustafa 
Introduction
Review the discussion from the previous session regarding the various abilities that 
tests measure, including specific skills, attitudes, cognitive skills, and knowledge. 
These target abilities are the objectives of  a test, and they underlie the purpose of  
any test. For example, the objectives of  a university admissions test gauge the skills, 
knowledge, and aptitude necessary to become a successful student once enrolled in a 
programme. In contrast, the objectives of  a promotion test gauge a candidate’s skills 
and knowledge attained beforehand. 
Test objectives ensure that tests are aligned with target cognitive levels, difficulty levels, 
or any other measurements of  student abilities. Objectives also help determine the 
length of  the test, as they inform the breadth and depth of  the domains covered by the 
test. Characteristics of  good test objectives include consideration of  learner qualities, 
targeted learner behaviour or competency , target content area, and test conditions. 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
40
Achievement tests
Introduce the concept of  achievement tests, which are the most common tests 
administered in schools. (In Pakistan, an achievement test is also known as a 
promotion test.) The objectives of  an achievement test are specific to particular 
content areas, skills, and cognitive levels. Test objectives are driven by the purpose of  
a test—for example, achievement tests measure student attainment of  knowledge and 
skills in a particular subject or grade.
Ask Student Teachers to think of  a subject that was covered by an achievement 
test they took in primary school such as English or maths. They should consider 
what those tests were designed to measure (e.g. reading skills), including particular 
learning outcomes (e.g. the ability to identify the main idea in a text).
The objectives of  an achievement test are the learning outcomes that students are 
expected to achieve. The National Curriculum 2006 refers to these outcomes as Student 
Learning Outcomes (SLOs). The learning outcomes are available for review from: 
 Ø http://passpunjabedu.com/index.php?option=com_phocadownload&view= 
 category&id=4:curriculums-2006&Itemid=34. 
Selecting test objectives 
Distribute the handout ‘Selected class 6 SLOs in English, mathematics, and science’, 
which covers SLOs for class 6. (The content is from the National Curriculum 2006.) 
Have Student Teachers work in groups of  six. Ask them to think about an 
achievement test in class 6 English, science, or maths. The group will select SLOs in 
their chosen subject and create a 30-minute test. They should consider the specific 
topic or skill that each SLO addresses.
Peer review
This activity is a preamble to an exercise that will run throughout the unit on test 
development. The groups will conduct a peer review of  the selected objectives and 
answer the following questions:
•	 Do the selected SLOs provide sufficient information to measure achievement?
•	 Are the selected SLOs measureable through a paper–pencil test?
Groups will provide the feedback to each other and revise the selection of  SLOs as needed.
COURSE GUIDE: Test Development and Evaluation
41
Handout
Selected class 6 SLOs in English, 
mathematics, and science
S
English Science Mathematics
1
Scan a simple text for specific 
information
Compare the structure 
of  a monocot leaf  and a 
dicot leaf  in terms of  
shape and venation
Read numbers up to 1 000 000 
000 (one billion) in numerals 
and in words
2
Make simple inferences using 
the context of  the text and 
prior knowledge
List the function of  
cotyledon
Add numbers of  complexity 
and of  arbitrary size
3
Express understanding of  a 
story through role play
Describe different kinds  
of  pollution
Divide numbers, up to six 
digits, by a two-digit and 
three-digit number
4
Locate specific information 
in a calendar, a class 
timetable, and a report card
Describe the properties 
of  three states of  
matter on the basis 
of  the arrangement 
of  particles
Find highest common factor 
of  three two-digit numbers 
using:
•	 prime factorization  
 method
•	 division method
5
Write a story using the 
elements of  story writing
Describe friction and 
its causes
Multiply a fraction by a 
number and demonstrate 
multiplication with help of  
diagrams
6
Write short informal 
invitations for a variety of  
purposes to demonstrate the 
use of  conventions of  short 
invitations
Explain gravitational 
force using different 
examples
Divide a decimal with a  
whole number
7
Identify and use appropriate 
tone and non-verbal cues 
for different communicative 
functions
Investigate light that 
travels in a straight line
Solve real-life problems 
involving conversion, addition, 
and subtraction of  units of  
distance
8
Pronounce and spell more 
words with silent letters such 
as tch in switch, sch in school
Describe the flow 
of  an electric current 
in an electric circuit
Use protractor to construct:
•	 a right angle
•	 a straight angle
•	 reflex angles of   
 different measure
9
Locate, provide, connect and 
use words similar and opposite 
in meaning
Describe the effect 
of  moisture on soil 
characteristics
Read a simple bar graph given 
in horizontal and vertical form
 Source:	National	Curriculum	2006	for	English,	mathematics,	and	science.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
42
Designing a table of specification
Developed by Isbah Mustafa 
A table of specification
A table of  specification is the blueprint for a test. It specifies the content coverage, 
question types, marks distribution, and sometimes cognitive levels. 
Engage the class in a recall exercise by asking the Student Teachers about different 
levels of  Bloom’s Taxonomy and their description. 
Developing a table of specification for an achievement test
Have Student Teachers work in the same groups of  six as they did in the selecting 
test objectives activity (involving the handout ‘Selected class 6 SLOs in English, 
mathematics, and science’). Explain the structure of  the table of  specification in the 
handout ‘Table of  specification’, copies of  which should be distributed to the class. 
Each group will develop a table based on the SLOs they selected earlier.
One member of  each group will present the table of  specification to the class. A 
member of  the group will need to take notes on the observations and feedback 
offered by the class and the Instructor. 
Each group will revise their table of  specification based on this feedback.
T emplate for a table of specification
T opic/Skill Close-ended 
questions
Open-ended 
questions
Knowledge Understanding Application
Constructing test items
Developed by Dr Thomas Christie and Isbah Mustafa 
Introduction
Initiate a discussion by asking the class what qualities a good question has. Make sure 
the following points are made about good questions during the discussion:
•	 They precisely measure the targeted outcome.
•	 They have a refined structure, language, and rubric, which reinforce precision. Source:	National	Curriculum	2006	for	English,	mathematics,	and	science.
Number of Questions and 
marks to question type
Number of questions and  
marks to cognitive level
COURSE GUIDE: Test Development and Evaluation
43
Discuss these qualities in relation to how they apply to open- and close-ended 
questions. 
Related information is available from the following resources:
•	 Withers, G. (2005). Module	5:	Item	writing	for	tests	and	examinations. Paris:  
 International Institute for Educational Planning/UNESCO. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .iiep.unesco.org/fileadmin/user_upload/Cap_Dev_Training/ 
 Training_Materials/Quality/Qu_Mod5.pdf
•	 Item writing and review guide (2011). Retrieved from:
 Ø  http://www .assess.com/docs/ASC_Item_Writing.pdf
What is a mark scheme (or rubric)?
Introduce the concept of  a mark scheme, which is part and parcel of  a question, 
although it does not appear in the question itself. A mark scheme contains 
information about the maximum marks and their distribution, content area or skill 
covered by a question, a question’s difficulty level or cognitive level, possible answers 
or areas to be covered in the response, and a stimulus and its source. The mark 
scheme for questions for the paper specification developed earlier will also capture the 
SLOs on which a question is based. 
Command words
Give Student Teachers a copy of  the handout ‘Command words’. This activity will 
help Student Teachers recall the command words associated with Bloom’s Taxonomy . 
These command words are a very effective tool in determining the cognitive level a 
question is trying to measure. 
Ask Student Teachers to recall the command words and the level to which they 
belong. Record the command words and their respective cognitive level on the board. 
Note that some command words fall in more than one category . 
The following websites offer lists of  command words:
•	 Bloom’s Taxonomy action verbs (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .clemson.edu/assessment/assessmentpractices/
referencematerials/documents/Blooms%20Taxonomy%20Action%20V erbs.pdf
•	 Maynard, J. (n.d.). Bloom’s Taxonomy’s model questions and key words. 
  Retrieved from: 
 Ø http://www .cbv .ns.ca/sstudies/links/learn/1414.html
•	 Bloom’s Taxonomy with key words (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://achieve.psdr3.org/bloom.html
•	 Have Student Teachers review and identify the cognitive level in Bloom’s  
 Taxonomy that is being tested.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
44
Handout
Command words
1.Label the picture of  the plant cell.
2.Explain a plant cell.
3.Decide which of  the two cell pictures (below) is of  a plant cell. Justify your selection 
by listing two characteristics of  a plant cell that can be identified in the selected 
picture. 
S
Plant	cell
Cell	picture	1 Cell	picture	2
COURSE GUIDE: Test Development and Evaluation
45
Difficulty level
Introduce difficulty level. Explain that it defines the challenge the question poses to the 
testee. There are different methods of  measuring difficulty , including the following:
•	 calculating the proportion of  testees who respond correctly to the question
•	 estimating difficulty before the question is used.
With the latter method, each question is categorized as easy , moderate, or difficult 
based on the estimated percentage of  students who will respond correctly to it. 
In modern development, item response theory (IRT) (Rasch, 1960), is a ‘test analysis 
procedure that assumes a mathematical model for the probability that an examinee 
will respond correctly to a specific test’ (from http://www .nationsreportcard.gov/
glossary .asp).
In IRT , item difficulty and candidate ability are reported on the same scale, which 
is distributed like a normal curve. Item difficulty indicates what level of  candidate 
achievement is associated with a 50/50 chance of  success on the item.
Evaluating test items on the basis of their discrimination power
The discrimination of  an item is calculated to make sure that it is contributing to the 
reliability of  the test, or its internal consistency . The idea is that those who achieve 
high scores on an entire test are more likely to get a given item correct than those who 
are not high scorers. The calculation is straight forward:
1. R ank the total scores.
2. Di vide the scores into three groups: top, middle, and bottom. If  they do not 
divide evenly into three groups and there is a remainder, assign the remainder(s) to 
the top and bottom groups in equal numbers. For example, if  you have 107 scores, 
each of  the three groups will get 35 scores with two scores remaining. In this way 
the items are ranked appropriately .
3. F or each item, count the number of  testees in each group who got the item 
correct.
4. Subtr act the number of  correct testees in the bottom group from the number 
in the top group, and divide the difference by the number in the bottom group.
5. Y ou now have a proportion, called E 13, between +1.0 and –1.0. 
An item where E13 = +1.0 is ideal. It indicates precisely what the test item measures. 
Items where E13 is zero or negative should not be used. Unfortunately , rewriting the 
stem or answer options rarely works. It is better to think of  a new item from the same 
cell of  your specification grid. If  that does not work, reconsider your specification grid. 
Does that cell or topic really belong with the rest of  the test?
Note that in the Rasch model, every item is assumed to have the same discrimination. 
However, once you analyse a test, it will become very clear that reality does not always 
reflect the model.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
46
The task of question writing
Ask Student Teachers to work with the same group of  six from earlier lesson. Each 
group will be divided into three pairs. For homework, each pair must develop a set 
of  questions for class 6 students based on the table of  specification developed in a 
previous lesson. The answer key for close-ended questions, the mark distribution, and 
possible answers for open-ended questions should be included in the mark scheme. 
A summary of  the mark scheme should be submitted in the ‘Item classification table’ 
(template below).
T emplate: Item classification table
Item no. Marks Question 
type T opic Cognitive 
level
Estimated 
difficulty 
level
T est development
Developed by Isbah Mustafa 
Activity on test development
Have Student Teachers work in their groups of  six from previous sessions. Ask each 
group to develop a test that should take class 6 students 30 minutes to complete. This 
task involves:
•	 selecting items from a pool of  items that has three times as many items  
 as needed
•	 designing the front page of  the test, which should include instructions, an  
 explanation of  the marks, the allocated time, and the types of  questions 
•	 matching the pool of  selected questions with the table of  specification
•	 grouping the questions in the form by topic and the topics in ascending order  
 according to difficulty level.
Peer review
Ask the groups to peer review each other’s tests as homework. They should use the 
‘Review checklist’ handout for this task. They should also offer notes and comments 
to provide additional feedback. 
Based on the feedback received, each group should prepare a final draft of  their test. 
COURSE GUIDE: Test Development and Evaluation
47
Handout
Review checklist
No. Checking points Tick if the answer is yes
1 Are the instructions on the title page correct 
and complete?
2 Is the formatting uniform?
3 Are the marks listed correctly for each 
question?
4 Is the number sequence correct for the 
questions?
5 Do the total marks and question numbers 
match with the instructions on the front page?
6 Is the paper free of  grammatical or spelling 
errors?
7 Have all the topics in the table of  specification 
been covered?
8 Has the weight given to the cognitive levels in 
the table of  specification been followed?
9 Will the students be able to finish the test in 
the time allotted (i.e. 30 minutes)? 
Adapted from a checklist developed by AKU-EB for Institute for Business 
Administration Sukkur, standardized tests for classes 5 and 8, prepared by Isbah 
Mustafa.
S
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
48
T est conduct and marking
Developed by Isbah Mustafa 
Test conduct
Each group must arrange visits to three classes of  approximately 40 class 6 students 
to administer their sample test. The visit should be scheduled for 90 minutes, and 
Student Teachers will go in pairs. 
The pairs will introduce themselves to the students, explain the purpose of  the test, 
and ask for volunteers to take it. The students will have 30 minutes to complete the 
test. The pairs will provide the required instructions before, during, and after the test 
and will ensure the availability of  answer booklets, printed question paper, or other 
essential stationery .
Marking responses
After the test has been completed, the Student Teachers will ask the student 
volunteers to exchange test papers or answer booklets so that they can mark each 
other’s papers (peer marking). One member of  each Student Teacher pair will 
share the correct answers and the other one will roam around the room to assist 
students. There should be a couple of  open-ended questions that require the marker’s 
judgement. Advise the student volunteers on the criteria they should use to mark 
these responses. Collect the marked tests to complete the ‘Result sheet’ handout. 
(Student Teachers should retain the completed tests for future activities.)
Homework: Result sheet development
Each group will compile the results for each class by adding the number of  students 
responding correctly . A compilation sheet that includes all three classes should also be 
completed. The template for the ‘Result sheet’ should be used to complete the homework.
T emplate: Result sheet
Result 
sheet
School: Date of 
exam 
conduct:
Examiners: Tota l 
students in 
the class:
Item no. T opic Number of 
students 
responding 
correctly
Percentage 
of students 
responding 
correctly
Actual 
difficulty 
level
Estimated 
difficulty 
level
Easy: 70% or more students responded correctly; moderate: 40–70% students 
responded correctly; difficult: 20–40% students responded correctly .
COURSE GUIDE: Test Development and Evaluation
49
Writing the examination report
Developed by Isbah Mustafa 
Discussion on examination reports
Student Teachers will discuss the result sheets in their groups of  six. Initiate the 
discussion by posing the following questions to the class:
•	 Which items have mismatched estimated and actual difficulty levels? Why did 
  the mismatch likely occur?
•	 On which SLOs have students performed well? Poorly?
Each group will address these questions. One group member should take notes on the 
discussion for writing the examination report. 
Writing an examination report
Each group will write an examination report. The report’s intended audience is the 
Instructor, and its purpose is to convey information about the test in general and the 
challenges emerging based on the questions regarding difficulty level and student 
performance. Discuss the specifics of  the text, including the subject, the testees’ 
characteristics, and the overall results. Issues relating to the difficulty level and student 
performance should each have their own section.
Writing a feedback report
Developed by Isbah Mustafa 
Discussion on examination report
Student Teachers will work in their groups of  six and discuss examination reports. It 
will be necessary for them to use the compiled result sheet and the individual sheets 
for each class. 
Begin by asking them which class performed the best and worst. Also, ask if  there was 
any consistency in class performance for each topic.
Each group should discuss class features that may have created differences. They 
should also think of  ways to help classes to overcome low performance, such as 
getting stronger students to work with the weaker students or re-teaching the more 
troublesome topics.
The groups will also consider the graphs and tables to be included in the report. One 
group member should take notes of  the discussion for writing the report. 
Sharing notes for the feedback report
A member from each group will share the group’s notes with the class. The 
presentation should address way to help low performing students and classes, and 
explain how the data will be presented in the report. The rest of  the class will give 
feedback, which should be recorded for use.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
50
Homework
Each group will write feedback reports for each class that took their sample exam. 
The report should address class performance and student performance. Simple graphs 
and tables should be used to present information, particularly to examine student 
performance. Also, suggest remedial action for classes with low performance in a 
given content area.
Unit assessment
Student Teachers should maintain a file containing the table of  specification, 
items developed, mark scheme and item classification table, drafts of  the test with 
comments from peers, a printed copy of  the test, the result sheet from one class, the 
compiled result sheet, and two reports. 
It is recommended that this assignment account for 20% of  the mark for this course. 
USE OF STANDARDS IN TESTING
Norm- and criterion-referenced tests
Developed by Dr Rizwan Akram Rana 
Warm-up questions
Ask the class some warm-up questions to gauge their existing knowledge on norm-
referenced and criterion-referenced tests. Questions might include the following:
•	 What two types of  tests are used in educational measurement?
•	 How would you described norm-referenced and criterion-referenced tests in  
 educational measur ement?
Group discussion
Introduce the differences between norms and criteria, and define the terms norm-
referenced and criterion-referenced	tests. It may be helpful to provide Student Teachers 
with some reading material that outlines these concepts, such as pp. 57–61 from 
Kubiszyn and Borich’s Educational	testing	and	measurement:	Classroom	application	and	
practice	(2003). 
Key words
•	 Norm-referenced tests
•	 Criterion-referenced tests
•	 Standards 
•	 Content-based standard setting
•	 Performance standards
•	 SOLO Taxonomy 
•	 Bloom’s Taxonomy
COURSE GUIDE: Test Development and Evaluation
51
Divide the class into three groups and ask each group to discuss these two types of  
tests, particularly with regard to interpreting the tests. The groups should categorize 
different types of  tests, such as driving tests, medical examinations, selection tests, 
or achievement tests, to have a better understanding of  the real-world application of  
these terms. Also, ask the groups to recall the different procedures used to interpret 
these tests. 
Interactive lecture
Conduct an interactive lecture in which you describe the purpose of  norm-referenced 
and criterion-referenced tests (Kubiszyn and Borich, 2003, p. 61) and when these two 
types of  tests should be used to test student performance (Shrock and Coscarelli, 
2007, pp. 28–29). Ask questions so that Student Teachers can share their knowledge 
– and allow you to gauge their understanding of  the topic. Consider adding a visual 
element by using a PowerPoint presentation.
 
The discussion should cover the following points:
•	 the purpose of  norm-referenced tests
•	 the purpose of  criterion-referenced tests
•	 comparing norm-referenced and criterion-referenced tests
•	 when to use norm-referenced tests
•	 when to use criterion-referenced tests.
Comparing of different scenarios
Have Student Teachers further examine the usability of  norm-referenced and 
criterion-referenced tests. 
Present the following three scenarios to the class. Ask the Student Teachers to analyse 
each scenario and decide whether a norm-referenced or criterion-referenced test 
should be used. They should explain how they came to their conclusion.
•	 In 1974, the Government of  Pakistan started a national distance education 
  programme by establishing Allama Iqbal Open University in Islamabad. This 
 university used television, audio tapes, and textbooks as learning resources. To 
  pass an exam, a student must attain 33% according to university assessment. 
•	 Students must take an exam in which they demonstrate specific skills in order 
 to become chartered accountants.
•	 The Higher Education Commission called for papers on educational 
 assessment. The authors of  the top five research papers will receive  
 50 000 Rs./-.
Idea conceived by Shrock and Coscarelli, 2007, p. 29.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
52
Conclusion
Summarize the main points of  the lecture and remind the class of  the main points 
covered in the introductory lecture:
•	 the purpose of  norm-referenced tests
•	 the purpose of  criterion-referenced tests
•	 comparing norm-referenced and criterion-referenced tests
•	 when to use norm-referenced tests
•	 when to use criterion-referenced tests.
Homework
Ask Student Teachers to write a brief  essay outlining the usability of  norm-referenced 
and criterion-referenced tests in Pakistan.
References
Kubiszyn, T ., & Borich, G. (2003). Educational	testing	and	measurement:	Classroom	
application	and	practice (pp. 57–61). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Shrock, S. A., & Coscarelli, W . C. (2007).	Criterion-referenced	test	development:	Technical	
and	legal	guidelines	for	corporate	training (pp. 28–29). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 
Inc.
The contributors would like to thank Tooba Saleem, Shumaila Hameed, Sehar Rashid 
and Nighat Ara Shams from IER, Punjab University for their contribution to the 
teaching notes.
Use of standards in education
Developed by Isbah Mustafa 
Introduction
Introduce the concept of  standards in the context of  teaching and, more specifically , 
the National Professional Standards for Teachers, which were developed in 2009. 
Engage the class in a discussion on the need for national standards. Responses should 
address issues such as quality assurance and uniformity across the country . 
National Professional Standards for Teachers
Distribute the ‘National Professional Standards for Teachers in Pakistan’ handout. 
This document includes the standards developed by the Policy and Planning Wing of  
Pakistan’s Ministry of  Education in 2009, which are available in full from: 
 Ø http://unesco.org.pk/education/teachereducation/files/National%20 
 Professional%20Standards%20for%20Teachers.pdf
Explain why each standard has a content, disposition, and performance component, 
and use the standards as an example. 
COURSE GUIDE: Test Development and Evaluation
53
Activity on National Professional Standards for Teachers
Working in groups of  three, have Student Teachers appraise the list of  10 standards 
for their comprehensiveness and relatedness. After the groups have had sufficient time 
to discuss the standards, they will join with another group to discuss their analysis.
Each group will present the learning outcomes to the class.
Conclusion 
Summarize the need for standards in teacher education. Note that in developing 
a set of  standards, effort must be made to ensure that they are both relevant and 
comprehensive. Explain how each teacher standard is structured; note the heading, 
the two- to three-sentence description, and learning outcomes that test content, 
disposition and Student Teacher performance.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
54
Handout
National professional standards for 
teachers in Pakistan
National professional standards for teachers in Pakistan
Standard 1: Subject matter knowledge
Standard 2: Human growth and development
Standard 3: Knowledge of  Islamic ethical values/social life skills
Standard 4: Instruction planning and strategies
Standard 5: Assessment
Standard 6: Learning environment
Effective communication and proficient use of  information Standard 7: communication technologies
Standard 8: Collaboration and partnerships
Standard 9: Continuous professional development and code of  conduct
Standard 10: Teaching of  English as second/foreign language (ESL/EFL)
Composition of professional standards
Each standard has 3 parts
a. Knowledge and Understandings (Content) 
What the teacher knows
b. Dispositions 
Behaviors, attitude and values
c. Performances (Skills)
What the teacher can do and should be able to do
From the National Professional Standards for Teachers, p. 9. Available from:
 Ø http://unesco.org.pk/education/teachereducation/files/National%20 
 Professional%20Standards%20for%20Teachers.pdf
S
COURSE GUIDE: Test Development and Evaluation
55
Use of standards in testing
Developed by Isbah Mustafa 
Standards-referenced test
Explain the difference between norm-referenced and criterion-referenced tests. 
The former produces results by comparing students with each other and the 
latter produces result based on a selected criterion (e.g. skill or content area). 
The skill or criterion serves as the standard on which performance is measured. 
A criterion-referenced test is considered to be a more precise tool, as it reports 
student achievement with regard to a specific set of  abilities. This also enables it 
to be used, with different questions on the same topics, to measure change over 
time or to compare performance within a group. The most common example of  a 
criterion-referenced test is the promotion examination. When a student fails a grade 
promotion exam, this indicates that the student has failed to achieve the set goals for 
the grade. More recently , student abilities have been gauged with criterion-referenced 
tests using standards. 
The purpose of standards-referenced testing
Introduce the benefits of  standards-referenced tests, such as precision of  reporting. 
Explain how standards-referenced tests show student progress because they relate 
performance to standards. Standards also facilitate comparison of  students in different 
cohorts, as student performance is matched to standards that are uniform for all. 
Remind the class of  the SLOs used earlier in the test development exercise in which 
groups developed three sets of  items based on the same SLOs. In the same way , 
different forms of  a test can be constructed based on same standards. 
Ask Student Teachers to share a standards-referenced test they have come across in 
their academic career. Using the examples supplied by the Student Teachers, discuss 
how standards help support testees in achieving the examination’s set goal. 
Using standards in testing
The National Curriculum 2006 includes competency in content areas, standards, 
benchmarks, and Student Learning Outcomes (SLOs). Standards are defined in the 
curriculum as ‘[defining competency] by specifying broadly , the knowledge, skills 
and attitudes that students will acquire, should know and be able to do in a particular 
key learning area during twelve years of  schooling’ (National Curriculum for English 
Language Grades I–XII, 2006, p. 5)
Share the ‘Standards in testing’ handout. Ask Student Teachers to read the table and 
decide what the test intends to measure. The table clearly indicates that the aim is to 
maintain assessment focus on the competencies and standards. 
Conclusion
End the session by asking the Student Teachers to write a paragraph explaining what 
standards are and how they are used in testing. 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
56
S
Handout
Standards in testing
T able 6.3: Recommended allocation of marks in relation  
to standards, benchmarks and SLOs for Grades IX-X
Reference Benchmarks: language and skill focus No. Weighting
(please see detailed benchmarks) of 
SLOs
Paper A Paper B
Percentage Marks Percentage Marks
C1, S1 Patterns of text organization 4 15% 11 - -
Reading comprehension strategies 7 30% 23 - -
Interpretation of visual organizers 5 15% 11 - -
Study skills 6 CA CA CA CA
C1, S2 Interaction with literary texts 9 25% 19 - -
C2, S1 Techniques for effective text organization, 5 - 15% 11
development and writer’s craft
Descriptive, narrative, expository, 8 - 20% 15
persuasive, analytical writing
Interpersonal and transactional writing 8 - 20% 15
Editing and revising 4* CA CA CA CA
C3, S1 Functions and co-functions* 1 FA FA FA FA
Group dynamics* 4 FA FA FA FA
C4, S1 Pronunciation development* 4 FA FA FA FA
C4, S2 Vocabulary enhancement 2 15% 11 - -
C4, S3 Grammatical functions 9 - - 25% 19
Mechanics of punctuation 3 - - 10% 7.5
Sentence structure 4 - - 10% 7.5
C5, S1 Attributes for peaceful co-existence CA CA CA CA CA
Valuing self and diversity CA CA CA CA CA
Approach contemporary issues as CA CA CA CA CA
thinking individuals
Tota l 100% 75 100% 75
CA, classroom activity; C, competency; FA, formative assessments; S, standard. From the National 
C
urriculum for English Language Grades I–XII (2006), p. 159. Available from: http://passpunjabedu.com/index.
php?option=com_phocadownload&view=category&id=4:curriculums-2006&Itemid=34
COURSE GUIDE: Test Development and Evaluation
57
The need for standard setting
Developed by Dr Khalid Saleem 
Measuring content and performance
Start the session with a brainstorming activity. Ask Student Teachers how they 
would judge the performance of a cricket player.
Student Teachers will likely respond that the performance is judged by how well the 
player has played.
Next ask them how they would know that a student is good in social studies.
Student Teachers will likely respond that a student who has knowledge of social 
studies is a good student. 
Use these responses to show that the differences in measurements applied: 
performance standards and content standards. 
Content and performance standards
Describe various methods used to judge performance in different fields. Explain 
that an approved way of doing the things is called a performance standard. As noted 
earlier, a cricketer’s performance will be judged on performance standards whereas a 
social studies student’s knowledge will be determined on content standards.
In education, content standards indicate what should be taught and assessed, and 
performance standards indicate how well the content standards have been met. 
Explain content standards by describing how they help to form learning outcomes. 
As an example, refer to the National Curriculum 2006’s SLOs, which have two 
parts: one that refers to the desired outcome and one that refers to the outcome with 
regard to the content area.
Next explain performance standards and performance descriptors. (Use the 
information on the following site from the British Columbia Ministry of Education 
to inform your lecture:  
 Ø http://www .bced.gov .bc.ca/perf_stands/reading.htm
Conclusion
Conclude by asking Student Teachers to list differences between the objectives and 
structure of content and performance standards. 
Setting content-based standards 
Developed by Isbah Mustafa 
Composing of content standards 
Provide Student Teachers with a copy of the ‘Selected class 6 SLOs in English, 
mathematics, and science’ handout (from the ‘Defining test objectives’ section). 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
58
Working in pairs, Student Teachers will identify 10 command words and 10 content 
areas in the SLOs. This activity will help Student Teachers better understand the 
structure of SLOs. 
Once they have identified command words and content areas, ask the pairs to 
categorize the SLOs based on the level of effort, which includes elements such as the 
time required for learning, required effort from students, and required effort from 
teachers. In this case, Student Teachers should focus on teacher effort. 
Student Teachers will place the SLOs in three categories: SLOs achievable by 
teaching one 40-minute class, SLOs achievable by teaching in three or four classes, 
and SLOs requiring more classes. For example, ‘Write a story using the elements of 
story writing’ would fall into the third category, as this requires students to include 
the following basic elements when writing a story:
•	 character
•	 plot
•	 conflict
•	 setting
•	 theme.
It is assumed that without prior knowledge of this area, class 5 students would 
require more than four classes to be able to achieve this. 
Setting content standards
Initiate a discussion on requirements for content standards, particularly the 
requirements related to selecting targeted content and the involvement of experts. 
On the board, list these two requirement categories and then write Student Teachers’ 
responses according to the category to which they feel the requirements belong.
Conclusion
Ask for volunteers to summarize the composition of content standards and the 
essential requirements for setting content standards. Invite other Student Teachers to 
add to the summaries provided by their peers.
Performance standards
Developed by Isbah Mustafa 
Introduction
Explain that performance standards are a further development of content standards. 
They define expected performance relative to a particular content area or skill. 
In this context, the term standard is used as a set score students need in order to 
demonstrate that they have the relevant knowledge or skills. Performance standards 
are defined as ‘[a]n objective definition of a certain level of performance in some 
domain in terms of a cut score or a range of scores on the score scale of a test 
measuring proficiency in that domain’ (from  https://www .questionmark.com/us/
Pages/glossary .aspx#P).
COURSE GUIDE: Test Development and Evaluation
59
Performance standards or levels are established along a range of scores. For example, 
examinees are classified in different levels, such as pass/fail, a range of six marks, or 
a range of nine marks (stanines). 
Using performance standards
Ask Student Teachers to think of the benefits of performance standards and 
invite them to share their ideas. Engage the entire class in a discussion on these 
benefits. Make sure that Student Teachers note that performance standards support 
accountability, as they clearly define what an examinee has achieved in terms of 
content knowledge or skill. 
Performance descriptors
Reintroduce the concept of performance descriptors, which was discussed in the 
section ‘The need for standard setting’. A descriptor consists of a statement of the 
knowledge, skill, or ability an examinee must display at a particular performance 
level. It may include sample responses that reflect the level of performance. 
The exemplar level of performance for an examinee is determined by considering the 
borderline examinees. A borderline examinee is one who is barely fits into a given 
category. 
Evaluation of performance descriptors
Share a list of performance descriptors. Examples can be found on the following 
sites:
•	 Languages: Assessable elements and descriptors of quality for A–E (2007).
 Ø http://www .qsa.qld.edu.au/downloads/p_10/qcar_aed_languages.pdf
•	 Student performance standards (n.d.) 
 Ø http://www .ce.utexas.edu/prof/mckinney/StudentPerformanceStandards. 
   htm
•	 GPS by grade level, K–8 (2011).
 Ø  https://www .georgiastandards.org/standards/Pages/BrowseStandards 
  GPS_by_Grade_Level_K-8.aspx
Working in groups, Student Teachers will judge the descriptors’ suitability for 
primary students in Pakistan. Each group will present their evaluation in class. 
Alternatively, Student Teachers can ask the English teacher at their school for pieces 
of student writing that meet the class 5 performance standard, ‘Write a story using 
the elements of story writing’. Student Teachers will review these pieces and decide 
how the performance standard could be improved so that an agreement on standards 
is reached.
Cut score
Explain that a critical step in the development and use of performance standards on 
tests is to establish one or more cut points. These cut points divide the score range 
into performance levels, or grades scores. Cut scores are selected points on the score 
scale of a test. They represent the rules by which tests are interpreted. 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
60
Methods of performance standard setting
Developed by Isbah Mustafa 
Performance standard setting
Discuss the procedure for performance standard setting. Hambleton and Ritanick 
(2000) list the following steps in the procedure:
1) Select a standard-setting method.
2) Choose a panel and design.
3) Prepare descriptions of performance categories.
4) Train panellists to use the method.
5) Collect item ratings.
6) Provide feedback and facilitate discussion.
7) Compile panellist ratings and obtain performance standards.
8) Conduct panel evaluation.
9) Compile validity evidences and prepare technical documentation.
From Hambleton, R.K., & Pitoniak, M.J. (2006). Setting performance standards. In 
R. L. Brennan, Educational 	measurement  (4th ed.). Westport, CT: National Council on 
Measurement in Education and American Council on Education. 
The most common standard-setting methods
Introduce the two most common ways to set standards:
•	 test-centred standards 
•	 examinee-centred standards.
Ask Student Teachers to think about how these two methods differ from each other. 
Invite them to share their thoughts and then elaborate on them by filling in any gaps.
Test-centred standard setting
Introduce the Angoff Method, a method frequently used to set standards. This 
method is used for multiple-choice items. A panel examines each question 
individually and determines the probability of a borderline student answering the 
question correctly. The number of probable correct responses from a borderline 
student is then totalled. The responses from all members of the panel are averaged 
to determine the performance standard. The panel then discusses its determinations 
to come to a consensus.
Many modified versions of the Angoff Method have used since the method was 
introduced in 1970s. 
Consider introducing other test-centred methods, such as Ebel’s approach.
COURSE GUIDE: Test Development and Evaluation
61
Examinee-centred standard setting
Introduce examinee-centred standard setting, which requires rating a sample of 
candidates. The two most common methods are the borderline group method and 
the contrasting groups method.
Borderline group method
This is the conventional practice followed by senior examiners setting O-level grade 
boundaries. Not every borderline is based on human judgement because it would be 
too time-consuming. Usually A/B, C/D, and E/F are identified in this way, but B/C 
and D/ E are consider the midpoints in the A/B to C/D ranges.
Contrasting groups method
The contrasting groups method calls for scrutiny of the performance of groups 
identified as ‘masters’ and ‘non-masters’ based on evidence external to the test itself. 
It is difficult to simulate without actual data. The closest Student Teachers could get 
would be to administer their test at its intended grade level, the grade below (for 
non-masters), and the grade above (for masters).
Ask Student Teachers to think about how performance standards could be developed 
using these two methods. Use the discussion to give additional details about these 
two methods.
Conclusion
Ask for volunteers to summarize the Agnoff Method procedure and examinee-
centred methods of standard setting.
Practise setting performance standards 
Developed by Isbah Mustafa 
In this activity, Student Teachers will perform a standards-setting exercise to 
understand the procedure and, thus, its potential use in Pakistan as content 
standards in primary, middle, and secondary school. 
Prerequisites
For the practicum, Student Teachers will need the test papers, answer booklets, 
compiled results, and class results prepared during the ‘Test development’ section.
Selecting a method to set performance standards
Ask Student Teachers to work in the same group of six as they did in the ‘Test 
development’ section. 
For the practicum in this unit, two groups will work together. Within the larger 
groups, one group will work on examinee-centred performance standard setting 
and one will work on test-centred performance standard setting. Each group will 
determine the material and information required to apply the method (e.g. multiple-
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
62
choice items for the Angoff Method, marked scripts for the examinee-centred 
method). Each group will write the procedure they think should be used to apply  
the method.
For homework, each group of six will do additional research online and in the library 
to confirm that they have outlined the steps correctly. They should also ensure that 
they have the necessary materials to conduct the exercise in the next session.
Based on each member’s research, the group of six will finalize their list of 
requirements. The groups should also assign tasks to various members (e.g. someone 
to do the calculations, a record keeper). 
The groups will calculate scores in order to determine the standards. Each group 
will first judge the identified standard and then share it with the class.
As homework, each group will prepare a report on the procedures involved in 
performance standard setting and what is appropriate for primary school classes. 
Group members will need to discuss their work and reach a consensus on their 
recommendations. For each method, the report should include a description, the 
requirements, and the necessary procedure. Also, explanations should be provided 
that outline why each method is appropriate in a given context. 
COURSE GUIDE: Test Development and Evaluation
63
Handout
Standardized tests
Handout developed by Dr Thomas Christie 
Teachers have access to just one or two classes in a particular school, and after a 
while, they may come to expect and accept their students’ performance as normal. 
In some cases, teachers may lose perspective. This is why external bodies must 
perform moderation exercises before they accept teacher assessments. The external 
body has access to results from many schools and is in a position to recognize huge 
differences in average performance between classes, even if teachers think their own 
class is ‘normal’. 
Standardized tests overcome this difficulty. They are piloted with carefully selected 
samples from a national or regional population of students. Many schools and 
classrooms are represented. The distribution of scores obtained by this sample of 
students (usually several thousand) is then scaled to a predetermined score range. 
For example, the observed average may be adjusted to 50, with a standard deviation 
of 10, so that just a few students score more than 80 or less than 20. These scores can 
then be interpreted in terms of examinee-centred standards: of 100 examinees, half 
will score 50 and only three will score above 70. Standardized tests, which usually 
have to be purchased to cover the costs of standardization, help classroom teachers 
understand their students’ performance in national terms. There are international 
standardized tests, such as Trends in International Mathematics and Science 
Study (TIMMS), that allow a nation to see how it stands in international terms. 
Student Teachers may wish to discuss why Pakistan does not participate in these 
international comparisons.
Standardized tests
Review the contents of the handout and discuss the following questions:
•	 What is a standardized test? 
•	 What is the process of test standardization?
•	 Why are there no Pakistani standardized tests?
Taxonomy in testing: Using Bloom’s Taxonomy in test 
development 
Divide the Student Teachers into groups of five and ask each group to recall the 
concepts of higher- and lower-order thinking. The groups should brainstorm and 
discuss the level of student understanding necessary for achievement or mastery at 
the end of primary and secondary school.
Bring the class back together, and give a member from each group one minute to 
share their ideas with the entire class.
In a mini-lecture, connect Student Teachers’ ideas about the levels of student 
understanding with Bloom’s Taxonomy. Explain how Student Teachers can choose 
appropriate Bloom’s levels for test items. 
S
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
64
Handout
Recognizing Bloom’s T axonomy level
List A is a set of items from the AKU-EB Secondary School Certificate Part 1 examinations.  
List B provides the SLOs that the items test. Match each item with the correct SLO. 
Grade IX student learning outcomes and test items
List A: Test Items List B: SLOs of Knowledge (K), Understanding 
(U) and Application (A) level
Which phases of the cell cycle are collectively 
called interphase?
A. G1, G2, and M
B.  S, G2, and M
C.  G1, G2, and S
D.  G1, M, and S
Identify food sources and metabolic functions of 
vitamins A, C, and D (K)
An invertebrate is found with the following 
characteristics:
•	 It lives only in sea water.
•	 Its body is covered with spines.
•	 Its internal skeleton is present.
In which phylum should it be placed?
A. Mollusca
B.  Nematoda
C.  Coelenterata
D.  Echinodermata
Describe the salient features of invertebrates 
using paramaecium, sycon, jellyfish, tapeworm, 
roundworm, earthworm, snail, butterfly, and sea 
star as examples (U)
In pea plants the flowers can either be purple or 
white. The allele for purple is P whereas the allele 
for white is p.
If a heterozygous purple plant is crossed with a 
white flowered plant, what percentage of purple 
and white flowered plants do you expect in the F1 
generation?
A. 100% purple
B. 75 % purple, 25 % white
C. 50 % purple, 50% white
D. 100 % white
Explain the relationship between biology and 
other branches of science (physics, chemistry, 
mathematics, geography, and economics) and 
relate the relationships with suitable examples 
from daily life (U)
A man has blood group AB and his wife has blood 
group O. What are the possible blood groups of 
their children?
A. AB and O only
B. A and B only
C. A, B, and O only
D. A, B, and AB only
Describe complete dominance using the terms 
dominant, recessive, phenotype, genotype, 
homozygous, heterozygous, P1, F1, F2 generations 
and proving it diagrammatically through a 
monohybrid genetic cross (A)
S
COURSE GUIDE: Test Development and Evaluation
65
List A: Test Items List B: SLOs of Knowledge (K), Understanding 
(U) and Application (A) level
What should a person suffering with bleeding 
gums and poor healing of wounds include in his/
her diet?
A. Dairy products
B. Citrus fruits
C. Red meat
D. Cereals 
Describe complete dominance using the terms 
dominant, recessive, phenotype, genotype, 
homozygous, heterozygous, P1, F1, F2 generations 
and proving it diagrammatically through a 
monohybrid genetic cross (A)
The conversion of insoluble fibrinogen into fibrin 
threads is carried out by enzyme thrombin, which 
works in the presence of vitamin K only. Here, 
vitamin K is acting as a(n)
A. substrate
B. active site
C. co-factor
D. inhibitor 
Explain why some enzymes require co-factor for 
their functioning (U)
The production of insulin on a large scale through 
bacteria has made insulin inexpensive and easily 
available to diabetic patients.
This indicates the relationship of biology with
A. mathematics
B. economics 
C. geography 
D. physics  
Define cell cycle and its main phases: interphase 
and division (K)
Taken from examination syllabus and examination papers of Aga Khan University Examination Board. 
After the class completes this handout, discuss the answers and engage them in a discussion about how 
they matched the items and SLOs.
Grade IX student learning outcomes and test items (cont.)
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
66
SOLO T axonomy and test development
Developed by Dr Muhammad Sarwar 
What is the SOLO Taxonomy? 
In a mini-lecture, explain the concept of Structure of Observed Learning Outcome 
(SOLO) Taxonomy and its five levels of understanding for a given topic or area of 
learning. 
Consider using the article ‘SOLO Taxonomy: Giving students a sense of progress in 
learning’, available from: http://edu.blogs.com/edublogs/2012/08/solo-taxonomy-
giving-students-a-sense-of-progress-in-learning.html, as a resource in preparing the 
lecture.
Divide Student Teachers into group of four or five, and ask them to brainstorm 
the use of SOLO Taxonomy in evaluating student learning relative to Bloom’s 
Taxonomy.
After the class has finished brainstorming, engage the class in a whole-class 
discussion about the advantages of the SOLO model for evaluating student learning. 
Determining the behaviours to be 
assessed
Developed by Dr Muhammad Sarwar 
Introduction
Ask Student Teachers what a learning outcome is. Write the salient points they make 
on the board. 
Explain that SLOs are statements that specify what students should know, be able 
to do, or be able to demonstrate when they have completed a programme, activity, 
course, or project. Outcomes are usually expressed as knowledge, skills, attitudes, or 
values. SLOs use a command word to specify student actions that must be observable 
and measurable demonstrations of an outcome.
Interactive lecture
Introduce three types of learning outcomes: 
•	 cognitive learning outcomes (knowledge or mental skills)
•	 affective learning outcomes (growth in feelings or emotional areas) 
•	 psychomotor learning outcomes (manual or physical skills). 
 
COURSE GUIDE: Test Development and Evaluation
67
CHARACTERISTICS OF A GOOD TEST
The concept of a good test
Divide Student Teachers into groups of four or five. Ask each group to list the key 
features that they believe are essential to a good test. Their responses should be 
based on their experiences as students. Each group will then share their list in the class. 
Summarize the common features of a good test as discussed by the Student 
Teachers, and then elaborate on the concept of a good test through a mini-lecture, 
literature review, and interactive group discussion. At the end of the session, ask 
Student Teachers whether they can objectively judge if a test is good or bad.
Item analysis 
Developed by Samreen Jalal
Warm-up questions
Review material from previous sessions by asking Student Teachers the following 
questions:
•	 How is the difficulty level of a test item determined?
•	 How is the discrimination index of a test item determined?
•	 How do you identify the plausibility of a test item?
Group discussion
Briefly describe the three elements of item analysis —item difficulty, discrimination, 
and plausibility—and provide Student Teachers with materials on the test 
development process and the use of item analysis in classroom assessment. (To 
prepare materials for class, use Ebel, 1991, pp. 220–233, and Nitko, 1996, pp. 308–317.) 
Divide Student Teachers into four groups. The groups will discuss the materials to 
gain a better understanding of the concepts. 
Present one of the topics listed below to each group:
•	 computation of an item difficulty index
•	 computation of an item discrimination index 
•	 item selection
•	 item revision.
Key words
•	 Item analysis
•	 Test reliability
•	 Test va l id it y
•	 Test ut i l it y
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
68
Ask each group to present their findings on the topic to the rest of the class. During 
the presentations, act as a facilitator and provide assistance when Student Teachers 
have difficulty explaining their points.
As an extension of this activity, develop and present an interactive lecture based on 
the points made by Nitko (1996, pp. 312–317). Consider using a visual presentation 
(e.g. PowerPoint presentation) to supplement the lecture. Invite Student Teachers 
to respond to questions and ask their own. Also, make sure to discuss the following 
during the lecture: 
•	 using item difficulty information to modify items
•	 using the discrimination index to improve test items
•	 using guidelines to select items for classroom tests.
Homework
Student Teachers will perform an item analysis using the question level student 
scores obtained in the ‘Test development’ unit.
Reference
Nitko, A. J. (1996). Educational	assessment	of	students. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
T est reliability
Developed by Dr Muhammad Sarwar, Dr Shafqat Hussain, and Dr Bashir Hussain 
Introduction
Explain the fundamental concepts of reliability and validity through a demonstration 
with a target. Draw concentric circles on the board, with a target in the centre. 
Provide a piece of chalk (or something that will leave a temporary mark) to three 
volunteers, and ask them to hit the target from a fixed distance. Note how close each 
came to the target, and then explain whether they were consistent (i.e. reliable) and/
or accurate (i.e. valid) in hitting the target.
Introduce the concept of reliability as consistent outcomes on repeated occasions. 
Explain the various types and methods of reliability analysis and discuss strategies 
for improving test reliability. Tell Student Teachers to be prepared to calculate 
reliability in the next session.
Practice session to calculate reliability of tests
Initiate a discussion by asking the Student Teachers to list possible advantages of 
having alternate or parallel forms of the same test, particularly from the perspective 
of an examinee. Ensure that Student Teachers make points related to reliability and 
that the following terms are introduced:
•	 interrater
•	 split-half, internal consistency
•	 test-retest. 
COURSE GUIDE: Test Development and Evaluation
69
Next explain ways to calculate reliability. Provide some test score data to Student 
Teachers and ask them to review the information in the context of reliability (i.e. 
calculate various forms of reliability). As Student Teachers work with the figures, 
walk through the room to help them with the task. This will help you assess whether 
Student Teachers are able to list and describe various measures of reliability and to 
identify the strengths and weakness of each.
Student Teachers should note that all forms involve a correlation between repeated 
attempts or repeated judgements: each one seeks consistency across repeated attempts.
T est validity 
Developed by Dr Rizwan Akram Rana 
Brainstorming
Ask Student Teachers the following questions on test validity:
•	 What are the characteristics of a good test?
•	 How is test validity defined?
•	 Why is a test required to be valid?
•	 What methods ensure the validity of a test?
Introduction
Introduce the topic of test validity with a brief description. Ensure that Student 
Teachers understand the difference between validity and reliability.
Interactive lecture 
Distribute a handout on test validity and related concepts. (Either use the resources 
listed at the end of this section or create a handout based on them.) Give Student 
Teachers 10 minutes to review the materials. 
After this, explain the concept of test validity and its importance in assessment and 
test development. Also, explain content, construct, concurrent and predictive validity, 
and methods to ensure test validity. Provide example of factors that affect test validity.
Group work
Divide Student Teachers into groups of four or five. The groups should discuss the 
material covered in the interactive lecture. Each group should compile a brief list of 
factors that can affect test validity, which they will then present to the entire class. 
The rest of the class and Instructor should provide feedback on whether the factor is 
likely to affect validity. 
Conclusion
Summarize the main points of the lecture as well as the points made by the Student Teachers.  
Assessment
Provide an example of a test you have developed. Ask the Student Teachers to establish 
its content validity and to write about the steps they would take to ensure the validity 
of a classroom test.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
70
References
Abell, L., Springer, W. D., & Kamata, A. (2009). Developing	and	validating	rapid	
assessment	instruments  (pp. 98–103). New York: Oxford University Press.
Miller, M. D., Linn, R. L,. & Gronlund, N. (2009). Measurement	and	assessment	in	
teaching (10th ed.) (pp. 70–106). Chicago, IL: R. R. Donnelley & Sons Co.
Phelan, C., & Wren, J. (2005–06). Exploring reliability in academic assessment. 
Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .uni.edu/chfasoa/reliabilityandvalidity .htm
The contributors would like to thank Tooba Saleem, Shumaila Hameed, Sehar 
Rashid, and Nighat Ara Shams from IER, Punjab University for their contribution to 
the teaching notes.
Relationship between test reliability and 
test validity 
Developed by Dr Rizwan Akram Rana 
Warm-up activity 
Ask Student Teachers the following questions:
•	 What can you conclude from the consistency of scores?
•	 Why is consistency sometimes required? Why is it sometimes undesirable,  
 especially in achievement tests?
•	 What procedures are used to ensure the reliability of students’ scores?
•	 What are some factors that affect the consistency of students’ scores?
Introduction
Introduce the notion of the relationship between test reliability and validity by 
providing definitions of each term. Make sure that students are clear about the 
distinction between these concepts.
Interactive lecture
Distribute a handout on test reliability and its importance in developing exams. 
(Either use the resources listed at the end of this section or create a handout based on 
them.) 
After Student Teachers have had time to review the handout, explain the different 
types of test reliability. The main point should include:
•	 test reliability
•	 the relationship between reliability and validity
•	 the different types of reliability
•	 methods for establishing external and internal consistency and reliability
•	 the interpretation of the reliability coefficient.
COURSE GUIDE: Test Development and Evaluation
71
Group work
Divide the class into groups of four or five, and ask them to discuss the points made 
in the interactive lecture. Each group will be required to calculate the internal 
consistency reliability of a classroom test, based on data provided by the Instructor.
Conclusion
Summarize the main points of the lecture as well as the points made by the Student 
Teac her s. 
Assessment
Ask Student Teachers to review test reliability at home and write 20 multiple-choice 
items on any subject of their choosing. Student Teachers should administer the test in 
an appropriate classroom by applying relevant procedures to calculate the test-retest 
and the split-half, internal consistency.
References
Abell, L., Springer, W. D., & Kamata, A. (2009). Developing	and	validating	rapid	
assessment	instruments . New York: Oxford University Press.
Miller, M. D., Linn, R. L,. & Gronlund, N. (2009). Measurement	and	assessment	in	
teaching (10th ed.). Chicago, IL: R. R. Donnelley & Sons Co.
Phelan, C., & Wren, J. (2005–06). Exploring reliability in academic assessment. 
Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .uni.edu/chfasoa/reliabilityandvalidity .htm
The contributors would like to thank Tooba Saleem, Shumaila Hameed, Sehar 
Rashid and Nighat Ara Shams from IER, Punjab University for their contribution to 
the teaching notes.
T ypes of reliability 
Developed by Dr Rizwan Akram Rana 
Brainstorming
Review aspects of reliability by asking Student Teachers the following questions:
•	 What is test reliability?
•	 Can you differentiate between the various types of test reliability?
•	 What are some factors that affect the consistency of students’ scores?
Introduction
Introduce the concept of rater (scorer) reliability as well factors affecting test reliability. 
Briefly describe different types of internal consistency reliability procedures, reader 
and rater (scorer) reliability, and factors affecting the reliability of test scores.
Reading and discussion
Distribute a handout on rater (scorer) reliability and factors that affect score 
reliability, including rubrics. (Either use the resources listed at the end of this section 
or create a handout based on them.) Use the handout as the basis for discussion. 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
72
Group work
Divide Student Teachers in groups of four or five, and provide the groups with data 
about test results. Each group will develop a scoring rubric for a common question 
and then score the same six pupils’ responses to the question. Each group will be 
required to calculate the rater (scorer) reliability within the group and the reliability 
between groups using group mean scores. 
Conclusion
Summarize the main points of the lecture.
Assessment
Ask the Student Teachers to study different concepts of test reliability at home. 
They should then write five essay items with scoring rubrics on any subject of their 
choosing. Student Teachers should administer the test in an appropriate classroom 
and apply relevant procedures to calculate scorer reliability.
References
Abell, L., Springer, W. D., & Kamata, A. (2009). Developing	and	validating	rapid	
assessment	instruments . New York: Oxford University Press.
Gardner, J. R. (Ed.).(2005). Assessment	and	learning. London: Sage Publisher.
Miller, M. D., Linn, R. L,. & Gronlund, N. (2009). Measurement	and	assessment	in	
teaching	(10th ed.). Chicago, IL: R. R. Donnelley & Sons Co.
Phelan, C., & Wren, J. (2005–06). Exploring reliability in academic assessment. 
Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .uni.edu/chfasoa/reliabilityandvalidity .htm
The contributors would like to thank Tooba Saleem, Shumaila Hameed, Sehar 
Rashid and Nighat Ara Shams from IER, Punjab University for their contribution to 
the teaching notes.
Utility of test
Developed by Dr Muhammad Sarwar, Dr Shafqat Hussain, and Dr Bashir Hussain 
This session will focus on the application of validity, reliability, objectivity, adequacy, 
and differentiability. It aims to ensure that Student Teachers are able to correctly 
score, interpret, and provide feedback on an individual’s test results. This session 
should also cover reporting tests (marks vs grades) and introduce the concept of the 
standard error of measurement. 
Test reliability and validity and standard error of measurement
Student Teachers will practise and apply their understanding of test reliability and 
validity as it relates to the standard error of measurement. In the practice session, 
Student Teachers should demonstrate that they can integrate test results with 
other information about the testee, such as other test and assessment results or 
performance/behaviour in different educational settings. 
COURSE GUIDE: Test Development and Evaluation
73
Providing feedback
Instruct Student Teachers on how to provide appropriate feedback regarding test 
results, both verbally and in writing, to the testee and other stakeholders, such as 
parents, teachers, or other professionals. 
Conclusion
Conclude the session with the summary of the characteristics of a good test.
References
Cohen, R., & Swerdlik, M. (2009). 	Psychological	testing	and	assessment: 	An	introduction	
to	tests	and	measurement  (7th ed.). McGraw-Hill.
FitzGerald, J. (1999). Testing the tests. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .actualanalysis.com/tests.htm
Hughes, A. (2003). Testing	for	language	teachers	(2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Miller, M. D., Linn, R. L,. & Gronlund, N. (2009). Measurement	and	assessment	in	
teaching (10th ed.). Chicago, IL: R. R. Donnelley & Sons Co.
Reliability & validity. Retrieved from: 
 Ø http://www .socialresearchmethods.net/kb/relandval.php
GRADING AND REPORTING 
Key words
•	 Statistics
•	 Modes of interpreting data 
•	 Measures of central tendency 
•	 Measures of variability
•	 Functions and uses of grades
•	 Types of grading 
•	 Principles for managing the grading process 
•	 Interpretation of test scores 
•	 Grading criteria
•	 Grading standards (description of grades, checklist, rubrics) 
•	 Modes of reporting 
•	 Problems in grading and reporting 
•	 Item analysis
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
74
The importance of statistics and modes 
of interpreting data 
Developed by Samreen Jalal
Introduction
Creating statistics involves techniques and procedures to summarize information 
that can be stated numerically. There are two broad categories: non-parametric 
statistics, which deal with counts of observations that make assumptions about 
probability, and parametric statistics, which assume that observations can be 
measured on a scale. Scales for parametric statistics have units that are observable, 
like yards or metres, or attributes made observable by measurement, such as ability 
or achievement. 
Explain that knowledge of statistics will help Student Teachers to collect, organize, 
and analyse data in order to make decisions about the teaching-learning process. 
Statistics have many benefits, including the following:
•	 If statistics are examined and analysed properly, then a teacher will have the  
  power to improve in the areas where students appear the weakest. 
•	 Statistics enable teachers to monitor student progress throughout the school year.
•	 Statistics help researchers analyse the results of their studies. 
•	 Statistics are key to the behavioural sciences, which are based on empirical  
 research.
Q and A session
Ask Student Teachers the following questions in order to check their understanding 
of statistical concepts:
•	 How many types of statistics are there?
•	 Which type of statistics deals with simple numbers of observations? 
•	 Which type of statistics is used by teachers to summarize results on  
 report cards?
•	 How we can interpret and analyse educational data?
Measures of central tendency
These are simply ways of identifying the most typical observation in a distribution.
The mode is the one that occurs most often. It can come anywhere in the 
distribution. In a very difficult test, it might be a score of zero. In a very easy test, it 
might be 10 out of 10. In a good test, it will be somewhere near the middle.
The median is the middle score and is usually reported in non-parametric statistics 
where each unit is indivisible.
The mean is parametric. However, its application can be difficult at first glance. For 
example, the average British family has a mother, a father, and 2.5 children, making 
COURSE GUIDE: Test Development and Evaluation
75
for a family of 4.5 people. While this does not worry a parametric statistician, it may 
worry you. What does half (0.5) of a child look like? The non-parametric version 
would have two adults and two children as the mean family size. Note that this is 
still true today, even though 30% of children come from single-parent homes. Non-
parametric statistics are not good at registering change.
Measures of variability
Developed by Samreen Jalal 
Q and A session 
Assess Student Teachers’ knowledge of variability measures by asking the following 
questions: 
•	 Which type of variability is found by subtracting the lowest number from  
 the highest number?
•	 How do you find the semi-interquartile range based on the median of the  
 top and bottom halves of the data? 
Instructor presentation 
Introduce measures of variability and provide examples of each. A measure of 
variation describes how spread out a data set is or the distribution of data. It is also 
known as a measure of dispersion or a measure of spread. A measure of variation 
indicates how ‘spread out’ the data set is. In non-parametric statistics, the measures 
include the median range and the interquartile range. The key measure of variation 
is the variance, which is the standard deviation squared. 
Explain and calculate these measures by giving the following examples:
•	 Range is the simplest measure of dispersion. It is defined as the difference  
  between the largest value and the smallest value in the data set:  
 Range = Xmax – Xmin = 109.5 – 9.5 = 100.
•	 Quartile  deviation, or semi-interquartile range, is defined as half of the  
  difference between the third and the first quartiles: QD = Q3 – Q1.
Presenting data 
Introduce different ways to represent observations in tables or graphs. The focus 
of the presentation should be the frequency of outcomes, which is represented on 
a frequency distribution. Most natural phenomena, such as the number of flowers 
on a bush, the numbers of bees in a hive, or the heights of children in a class, are 
distributed in the same way. 
Most observations will cluster around a central value, with progressively fewer 
cases at the more extreme values. This distribution is so common that it is called 
the normal	curve.  The normal curve was created based on a formula identified by 
a 16th-century mathematician named Gauss. (The normal curve is also referred 
to as the Gaussian curve.) The most useful feature of the normal curve is that the 
number of observations expected in each part of the curve is generally known. This 
is calculated in the table of areas under the normal curve, which are reported to four 
decimal places.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
76
The three measures of central tendency—mode, median, and mean—coincide with 
the middle of the normal curve. Between the point of inflexion, where the curve 
changes direction, and the central peak (or the mode), 32% of observations appear. 
The distance between these points on the scale is the standard deviation (SD). The 
mean and SD are the parameters in parametric statistics. We use the SD to convert 
scores on achievement to the chances of them occurring. Once it has been converted 
on the scale, and thus standardized, it becomes a constant like metres or kilograms, 
and we locate where we are on the SD curve in units on the baseline. Two SD from 
the mean along the baseline covers another 16% of observations, leaving just over 2% 
in the tail. Extending the scale to three SD covers 49.8% of observations. The normal 
curve never reaches its baseline. There is always the possibility of a more extreme 
observation that has yet to be seen.
The normal curve belongs to the world of perfect forms. It is a model that 
indicates the meaning of a mark, providing that the mean and SD of the marks are 
known. Once we know the mean and SD, the normal curve allows us to make an 
interpretation of a score.
For example, intelligence quotient (IQ) traditionally has had a mean of 100 and a SD 
of 15. (This stems from the original Binet–Simon test, which had a SD between 13 
and 16, depending upon the children’s age.) This tells us that scores of 145 (+3 SD) are 
very rare—they are so rare that most tests have 140+ as the highest measured IQ.
Discuss the normal curve with Student Teachers
 
Ask the Student Teachers to consider the following example:
A survey about dog ownership was taken in 20 homes. In each of the 20 homes, 
people were asked how many dogs they had. The results were recorded as follows: 1, 
2, 1, 0, 3, 4, 0, 1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 3, 2, 3, 2, 1, 4, 0, 0.
These data can be presented in a cumulative frequency distribution table.
COURSE GUIDE: Test Development and Evaluation
77
Number of dogs Frequency
(number of 
observations)
Cumulative 
frequency
Cumulative 
proportion
0 4 4 0.20
1 6 10 0.50
2 5 15 0.75
3 3 18 0.90
4 2 20 1.00
5 0 20 1.00
In real life, the data are skewed. For most people, one dog is enough. If the 
distribution of dogs is to be related to the normal curve, we simply need the number 
of observations for each number of dogs. Try to draw it as a histogram. 
Which of the following curves does the histogram resemble? 
Positive skew
Negative skew
Conclusion 
Briefly summarize the points discussed.
Reference
Kubiszyn, T., & Borich, G. (2003).	Educational	testing	and	measurement: 	Classroom	
application	and	practice (7th ed.) (pp. 235–250). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0 5 10 15
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0 5 10 15
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0 5 10 15
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
0 5 10 15
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
78
Handout
Measures of central tendency
The following are the final averages of 25 students in a maths class:
46 64 72 79 89
49 66 74 79 91
53 66 75 80 94
60 67 76 83 95
61 71 79 88 98
1) What is the mode?
2) What is the median?
3) Calculate the lower quartile, Q1, and the upper quartile, Q3.
4) Calculate the semi-interquartile range.
Answer the following questions based on this data set: 5, 7, 11, 12, 13, 18. 
5) What is the mean?
6) Add 8 to each data item. What is the new mean?
7) Subtract 6 from each data item. What is the new mean?
8) Multiply each data item by 7. What is the new mean?
9) Divide each data item by 5. What is the new mean?
S
COURSE GUIDE: Test Development and Evaluation
79
Measures of central tendency
Developed by Samreen Jalal
Answers: Measures of central tendency
Provide the answers to the handout so that Student Teachers may assess their 
performance.
1) 79
2) 75
3) 0.5(25) = 12.5 g round to next higher integer 13 g 13th number is  
 median = 75
4) Q1 = 64, Q3 = 88, semi-interquartile range = 12
5) 10
6) 19
7) 5
8) 77
9) 2.2
Ask Student Teachers what conclusions can be drawn about the mean.
References
Kubiszyn, T., & Borich, G. (2003). Educational	testing	and	measurement:	Classroom 	
application	and	practice (7th ed.) (pp. 250–259, 263–272). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Miller, M. D., Linn, R. L,. & Gronlund, N. (2009). Measurement	and	assessment	in	
teaching (10th ed.) (pp. 501–505). Chicago, IL: R. R. Donnelley & Sons Co.
Grading: Uses, functions, and types 
Developed by Samreen Jalal 
Q and A session 
Ask Student Teachers the following questions:
•	 How can we display students’ progress, strengths, and weaknesses? (Refresh  
 Student Teachers’ memories about item-based and examinee-based standard  
  setting.)
•	 What should the distribution of grades be? How should it be determined?
After a brief discussion, ideas on grading may be analysed and organized by the 
Instructor in light of how useful they might be in reporting student performance.
Presentation 
Introduce different types of grading: item-based (criterion-referenced) using a pass/
fail grading and examinee-based (norm-referenced) using actual scores transformed 
by the normal curve. Provide illustrations of each. 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
80
Explain the functions, uses, and types of grading. 
Consider using visual aids for the presentation, such as charts or a PowerPoint 
presentation.
Conclude by summarizing the concepts discussed.
References
Dalumpines, L. (2011). Evaluating learning outcomes: Grading and reporting 
students progress. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://education-teaching-careers.knoji.com/ 
 evaluating-learning-outcomes-grading-and-reporting-students-progress
Grading systems. (n.d.) Retrieved from: 
 Ø http://www1.umn.edu/ohr/teachlearn/resources/grading/index.html
Miller, M. D., Linn, R. L., & Gronlund, N. (2009). M easurement	and	assessment	in	
teaching	(10th ed.) (pp. 368–371). Chicago, IL: R. R. Donnelley & Sons Co.
Oosterhof, A. (2003). Developing	and	using	classroom	assessments	 (3rd ed.) (pp. 216–218). 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill Prentice Hall. Available at:
 Ø http://cfmebooksrof.jimdo.com/2013/07/10/ 
 developing-and-using-classroom-assessments-3rd-edition-ebook/
Principles and strategies for managing 
the grading process
Developed by Dr Thomas Christie 
The SSC examination in Pakistan reports has a total of 1100 marks based on eight 
subjects in defined subject groups: premedical, pre-engineering, humanities, and 
commerce. O-level examinations report grades in individual subjects on a seven-
point scale: A*, A, B, C, D, E and Fail. What are the advantages and disadvantages of 
these two reporting methods?
The SSC reporting method leads to false distinctions. If candidates’ exams were 
marked by a different marker from the same group of markers, it is likely that very 
few candidates would get the same mark. A candidate’s score may vary by 40 or 50 
marks if evaluated by a different marker. An award of 990 the first time could be 
considered worthy of 950 or 1040 by a different marker. As such, it is risky to assume 
that someone who scored 801 is more capable than someone who scored 799. 
If the SSC were to introduce score grades, say 100 marks in each grade, then most of 
this confusion would disappear, but there would be potential difficulties for those 
with borderline scores. 
COURSE GUIDE: Test Development and Evaluation
81
Score Grade
900–1100 A1
800–899 A
700–799 B
600–699 C
500–599 D
400–499 E
0–399 F (fail)
For example, the candidate with 801 marks would receive an A and would be 
convinced he was a better candidate than the one with 799 and a B. Most other 
people would agree even though there was no real difference.
O-level grades are designed to avoid this problem by having senior examiners inspect 
the performance of all candidates who fall one or two marks below an important 
borderline, usually A*/A, B/C, and E/F, and promote those who seem to belong with 
the group above.
SSC uses item-based criteria. O-levels use examinee-based criteria. The article in the 
following handout examines the matter further. The handout should be given to 
Student Teachers as home reading.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
82
Handout
Variation in Standards in Pakistani 
School Examination Boards
This paper was presented by Dr Thomas Christie in 2012 at the Aga Khan University 
Institute for Educational Development Pakistan Conference, In search of relevance 
and sustainability of educational change (1–3 November 2012).
Variation in standards in Pakistani school  
examination boards
T. Christie, Director, Aga Khan University Examination Board (AKU-EB)
The research opportunity
Some 4000 students apply for entry to AKU’s MBBS degree every year although there 
are only 100 places available. These students are unlikely to consider themselves 
average. They are applying for the most sought after course in one of the three 
top ranked universities in Pakistan. Moreover, entry is ‘needs blind’ so financial 
considerations need not influence the decision to compete except in relation to the 
not inconsiderable cost of sitting the Aga Khan University Admissions Test (UAT). 
Student motivation can be taken to be fairly uniform. The admission process is in 
two stages. In Stage-1 the top scoring 10 percent of applicants in UAT are identified, 
431 in 2011, 320 in 2012. At this stage the selection decision is based purely on test 
score: no demographic data are available to the constructors and scorers of UAT. The 
selected candidates then go into a detailed second phase scrutiny which comprises 
school performance, achievement in external examinations and two independent 
interviews to identify the 100 candidates who will enter the University. This research 
explores how the secondary school examination system conditions candidates’ 
chances of accessing a highly desired educational opportunity. Final admission 
decisions will have taken account of Higher Secondary School Certificate (HSSC) 
and A level examinations but here we are simply concerned with how preparation 
for different examinations at the end of secondary school stage, Grade X for SSC and 
grade XI for O level, relates to performance in the UAT. 
 
The University Admissions Test (UAT)
Table-1 seeks to establish the credentials of the University Admission Test as a 
measure of educational potential. There are two English essays, one double marked, 
to yield a total possible score of 18 derived from a common six band scale ranging 
from Novice with ineffective communication of ideas to Superior with fluent and 
natural use of English with minimal errors. The English MCQ tap reading skills. 
The science items derive from the syllabus elements common to the 2006 revision of 
the National Curriculum for grades XI and XII and the Cambridge A level topics and 
outcomes. This section alone deploys negative marking.
The third group, the reasoning items, are of the type commonly referred to as ‘word 
problems’ in Mathematics examinations. In both 2011 and 2012 science reasoning 
items have the highest correlation with the total UAT score. Not that the superiority 
is significant but the repetition in two different tests of the top place is a very strong 
S
COURSE GUIDE: Test Development and Evaluation
83
indication that the UAT calls for more than the mere recall of information. Table-2 
displays the first principal component of these two incompletely parallel versions 
of the UAT. A principal components analysis indicates how many underlying 
attributes are being measured but not what they are. Between 2011 and 2012 there 
was one change of UAT structure. While in the short writing task, “Explain the 
meaning of the given Urdu saying in a paragraph”, only the saying differed, in the 
argumentative essay there was a change of format as well as topic. Both topics were 
well rehearsed in newspaper op-ed pieces, 2011 from economics and 2012 from 
medical ethics, but the economics argument offered no ideational support whereas 
in 2012 candidates were given a range of eight assertions to draw upon. The essays 
were more homogeneous as a result and the writing loading in Table-2 reduced in 
consequence. The fluctuation in physics is also a function of reduced variance. The 
physics test in 2011 was too demanding and therefore contributed less variance to the 
UAT as a whole. Nevertheless although the analysis is sensitive to these variations 
the test does remain stable overall. Clearly one can entertain a range of hypotheses 
about what is being measured but the test constructors set out to capture readiness 
for medical education and it seems not unreasonable to suppose that the UAT is 
measuring the ability to think through problems encountered in short order, some of 
them for the very first time, just as in an Accident and Emergency Unit. However the 
problems set have to be sufficiently challenging to identify the top ten percent of a 
highly (self) selected population. These candidates are part of the intellectual capital 
of the nation. The creation of intellectual capital is traditionally the guiding purpose 
of schools and the recognition of these outcomes is the task of school examination 
boards working within the confines of the social expectations codified in the national 
curriculum.
Comparison of academic standards
There are three secondary school curricula in circulation in Pakistan, the National 
Curriculum of 2002 and earlier which was characteristic of the SSC while the 
candidate group under review was being educated, the revisions of 2006 through 
2008 which are now recognised in part through revised question paper formats 
but implemented in full only by the two boards with a national remit, Federal 
Board of Intermediate and Secondary Education (FBISE) and Aga Khan University 
Examination Board (AKU-EB), and finally the GCE syllabuses examined by 
Cambridge International Examinations (CIE). Admission to a university medical 
school is conditional in all three curricula on a common subject combination, the 
premedical group, which comprises English, Urdu, Mathematics, Pakistan Studies, 
Islamiyat, Physics, Chemistry and Biology.
In the Boards of Intermediate and Secondary Education (BISE) which run the 
national school achievement certificates, great reliance is placed on the syllabus, or 
to be precise, the single text book approved for the course. Any departure there from 
can render the examination null and void. The FBISE, AKU-EB and GCE examine 
syllabuses and do not disallow any textbook. The choice of learning material is at the 
discretion of the schools. The BISE submit to further control of examination format 
with agreed numbers of MCQ, short response, essay and where appropriate practical 
marks with rather looser control of question choice while in O levels question choice 
varies from subject to subject from none at all in O level mathematics to a free for all 
in the general paper. Within these restrictions the marks of the BISE are treated as 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
84
fixed and unchallengeable, grades are derived mechanically from the marks and any 
suggestion that they might be scaled is seen as tampering with a revealed truth. The 
grade boundaries, 80% of available marks down to 33% are treated as benchmarks, 
a kind of gold standard “untainted by values, culture or power” (Bloxham & Boyd, 
2012, p.617). Certainly the candidates are essentially powerless. They cannot appeal 
against the marks assigned by the BISE. 
There is only one softening of this absolutist stance. The award of an SSC is based 
on the raw mark total of eight subjects though failure in any one means failure 
overall. However it is well established that “decision rules which do not allow any 
compensation at all tend to show the worst results in terms of classification accuracy” 
(Van Rijn et al, 2012). This is presumably the rationale for ‘grace marks’, 5 marks out 
of 550 deployed over two subjects at the pass/fail borderline to the candidate’s best 
advantage. Otherwise standards are absolute and absolutely the standards of the 
BISE. The candidates play no obvious part in establishing standards. The cut-offs are 
determined before a single candidate is examined and will remain fixed until IBCC 
chooses to change them.
How different are O level standards. They are essentially subject based and as 
subjects are intrinsically different fall back upon man, or at least boys and girls, 
as the measure of all things. The O level standard was initially that about 60% of 
about 15% of the population who stayed on beyond the school leaving age, should 
be awarded a pass. So O level standards were based on percentages of candidates, 
not percentages of marks. It is the candidates and of course their schools who set the 
standard in “a socio-cultural paradigm [which] recognises assessment as a context-
dependent, socially-situated, interpretative activity” (Shay, 2004). No wonder that 
where parents can afford it schools flock to O level. When CIE approached IBCC 
for recognition of its new A* grade as equivalent to 95% of available marks, CIE 
recognised the inherent improbability of such a mark in any subject which leaves 
room for examiners’ judgement with the reassurance that this would be a rare award 
to a few outstanding individuals. But in the socio-cultural paradigm, the grades are 
in fact examiners’ judgements of what the marks may mean. It sometimes seems that 
in Pakistan’s private schools it is grades other than A* and A which are rare awards 
these days but we do not know. Contrary to the guidelines laid down in Standards	for	
Educational	and	Psychological	Testing  (1999) which encapsulates the combined wisdom 
of the American Educational Research Association, the American Psychological 
Association and the National Council for Measurement in Education, CIE does not 
publish its Pakistani grade or score distributions. It does not reveal the social impact 
of its grading decisions. They are a commercial secret.
There are thus two approaches to standard setting in Pakistan, standards defined by 
the questions and their mark schemes which are determined in advance and  
standards defined by the examiners who ensure that the best candidates’ performances 
 are deemed worthy of 95% of marks regardless of subject. The Cambridge approach 
betrays its origins in norm –referencing, whereas the BISE are operating a kind of 
absolutist criterion referencing: a competence is demonstrated or it is not, and that is 
that. The BISE standards are embedded in the construction of the paper.
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
85
The educational impact of the two examination systems can be evaluated by 
reference to AKU’s University Admission Test but only for a self-selected group 
of high flying candidates. Candidates know their SSC results when they make the 
decision to apply. Most of them will also have an impression that to get into AKU 
medicine you have to be a pretty high achiever, but the strength of that impression 
is not known and is certainly not uniform given that applicants are distributed 
nationwide. The conventional approach to equating results through a common 
calibrating instrument is to scale each Board’s distribution of scores using the 
means and sds of the calibrating test, in this case the UAT, but the accuracy of that 
procedure depends upon the representativeness of the Board samples. If the students 
attempting UAT are a biased sample of the students from the parent board and the 
bias is not a constant across boards, the measures of central tendency upon which 
such comparisons are based will be differently centred, rendering the comparison 
untenable. 
Competitive edge
In seeking an alternative to scaling, we return to the notion of “being in with a 
chance”. The various boards have been compared by considering whether they 
confer any competitive advantage on their students, that is whether students at the 
same grade level experience different fates. CIE with a top grade equivalent, they 
claim, to 95% of marks occupies a space for which the BISE do not even have a name. 
Their A1 grade starts at 80% of marks though the Federal Government of Pakistan 
makes a cash award to every candidate who scores more than 90% SSC marks. Given 
the prevalence of O level students in the applicant samples, the analysis has had to 
play in O level territory. Candidates recorded as scoring between 90% and 100% 
and between 80% and 89.9% are located in ‘bounded’ categories, that is the top and 
bottom of the grades is known and what lies between the cut-offs shares a common 
designation in all BISE. While we cannot evaluate the general educational standards 
of the BISE by reference to UAT we can establish whether any board gives talented 
candidates receiving the same overall SSC grade a competitive edge in pursuing an 
academic education in medicine.
Table-3 sets out the odds on being considered for an MBBS place for candidates 
with SSC scores in the same grade interval. Not included are 52 applicants from the 
US of whom 4 were shortlisted, nor 43 applicants, none successful, taking school 
examinations from other countries. 
There are four noteworthy features of Table-3 in relation to public examination 
standards in Pakistan. The first is the consistency in the pattern of outcomes 
between years. In every board the examination questions are different in consecutive 
years but the educational value of its top grades in the premedical group remains 
remarkably stable even though the number of top grade candidates applying for AKU 
fluctuates quite widely. There is clear evidence that a standard is being maintained in 
consecutive years, but unfortunately it is not the same standard in every board.
Karachi and the Sindh BISE are at one extreme. Not a single applicant has reached 
the shortlist in 2011 and only two in 2012. The Sindh boards examine half of the 
elective subjects in Year IX and the remaining subjects in year X. All other Pakistani 
Boards examine every subject twice, covering half of the subject syllabus in year IX 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
86
and the rest of the subject syllabus in year X. Sindh has never offered a rationale for 
not falling into line with the other provinces but the implicit message that subjects 
are bodies of knowledge to be mugged up just for the short term is associated with 
extremely deleterious wash back effects. In each of the three sciences the Karachi 
mean UAT score is more than half a standard deviation below the overall mean of 
all applicants and in science reasoning it falls more than a full standard deviation 
short of the overall mean, a huge effect. It is not that there is no talent in the whole 
of Sindh. These young people have been misled by the apparent value of their BISE 
marks.
At the other extreme we have O levels which certainly dominate the pursuit of 
places. The effect of grading as an interpretative activity (Christie and Forrest,1981; 
Gipps,1999) is clear to see. O level borderlines are drawn by very senior examiners 
who have educational values, by no means always venal. They clearly have a view 
of A* as having much less to do with 95% than with potential to benefit from a high 
quality university education. It is notoriously difficult to capture that potential in a 
verbal description but they seem to share much the same assumptions that underlie 
AKU’s UAT. The O level examiners are spotting talent that has flowered into 
remarkable educational achievement in very privileged schools and they are good at 
it. Look at the fate in 2012 of those they have passed over from the same privileged 
schools: it is no different from that of high grade SSC candidates who have had one 
fewer year of rather more mundane schooling. This is not the educational diet for 
everyone. 
“A deep strategic approach to studying is generally related to high levels 
of academic achievement, but only where the assessment procedures 
emphasize and reward personal understanding. Otherwise surface 
strategic approaches may well prove more adaptive.” (Entwistle, 2000, p4) 
That leaves the fourth feature of Table-3, the noise in between which is gradually 
taking on a more structured appearance. The two BISE with a national remit, 
the Federal Board and AKU-EB, are at the moment clearly distinguished from 
the BISE with a provincial identity. The distinction is at least in part curricular. 
Examining across provinces the national boards have to examine not text books 
but syllabuses, the 2006 revision of the National Curriculum in both cases. Its 
emphasis on understanding and the application of knowledge is clearly paying 
dividends in the expansion of genuine educational opportunity beyond the deep 
pockets required for O level schooling. But the distinction is not permanent. The 
Lahore BISE is just two years behind them in adopting the 2006 syllabuses and the 
benefit is being further reinforced by the reorganisation of the Punjab BISE. They 
have adopted a new strategy of giving each Board sole responsibility for a few 
subjects for the whole province. The emergence of a subject focus within the Punjab 
Boards is an important counterpoise to the “one strategy fits all” that underlies 
rote memorisation. If standards are associated with subjects rather than an overall 
aggregate, distinctive features of subject performance come into play and examiners 
begin to look for subject appreciation rather than excellent recall. There is some 
evidence that such a shift is occurring in Lahore. The top tier are getting a sound 
preparation for university education. There is a qualitative difference between 
these students and those who fall in the 80 – 89% grade. The hope for education 
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
87
in Pakistan is that as the exam boards get better at identifying the skills which are 
relevant for higher education the students they identify will be able to sustain their 
performance levels for the benefit of the nation as a whole. 
References
Bloxham, S and P, Boyd (2012), Accountability in grading student work: securing 
academic standards on a Twenty-first century quality assurance context, British 
Education Research Journal , 38, 4, p615-634.
Christie, T. And Forrest, G.M. (1981), Defining public examination standards , 
London Macmillan Education 
Gipps, C (1999) Socio-cultural aspects of assessment. Review of Research in 
Education 24, 355-392.
Shay, SB (2004), The assessment of complex performance: a socially situated 
interpretative act, Harvard Education Review  74 (3), p307-329.
Van Rijn, PW, Beguin AA and HHFM Verstralen (2012), Issues and implications 
of high stakes decision making in final exams in secondary education in the 
Netherlands, Assessment in Education Principles, Policy and Practice  19(1), p117-136.
T able-1: Internal structure of the AKU University 
Admission T est
(Correlations	above	and	to	the	right	of	the	diagonal	relate	to	2011,	below	and	to	the	left 	
to	2012.)
Overall (n=4273) Eng. 
Essay
Eng. 
MCQ
Biology Chemistry Physics Science 
Reasoning
Maths 
Reasoning
2011
Tota l
Eng. Essay (18 
marks)
0.46 0.41 0.30 0.21 0.46 0.38 0.61
Eng. MCQ (30 
Marks)
0.38 0.55 0.32 0.24 0.56 0.44 0.73
Biology (20 marks) 0.31 0.58 0.60 0.51 0.62 0.41 0.82
Chemistry (20 
marks) 
0.24 0.31 0.55 0.63 0.46 0.24 0.70
Physics (20 marks) 0.26 0.39 0.58 0.62 0.37 0.18 0.60
Science Reasoning 
(30 marks)
0.32 0.53 0.69 0.62 0.61 0.60 0.84
Maths Reasoning 
(20 marks)
0.33 0.59 0.56 0.31 0.42 0.54 0.66
2012 Total  
(158 marks)
0.48 0.75 0.84 0.70 0.75 0.85 0.75
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
88
T able-2: First principal component of UAT in 2011  
and in 2012.
 2011 (n=4879)  2012 (n=3196)
Subject
Marks Mean S.D. Factor 1 Mean S.D. Factor 1
English Essay 18 9.23 3.30 .64 9.99 2.57 .50
English Reading 30 14.08 4.68 .73 17.01 5.78 .73
Biology 20 9.66 4.65 .84 9.91 5.22 .84
Chemistry 20 9.05 4.63 .71 7.82 4.79 .72
Physics 20 5.91 3.52 .61 7.86 4.54 .76
Science 
Reasoning
30 16.43 5.73 .85 17.10 5.47 .85
Maths Reasoning 20 8.67 4.49 .70 12.86 5.82 .70
Total Score 158 63.79 20.56 82.55 25.74
% Variance 
explained 
54% 53%
T able-3: Probability of being included in the top 10 
percent of applicants to AKU’s MBBS of the top two 
grades of school achievement scores.
 School marks 90 – 100%  School marks 80 – 89.9%
BISE
2011 2012 2011 2012
n p n p n p n p 
AKU-EB 5 0.20 3 0.33 58 0.10 54 0.07
FBISE 67 0.16 73 0.19 213 0.05 142 0.06
BISE Lahore 220 0.11 89 0.06 144 0.01 71 0.00
Rest of  
Punjab
332 0.06 133 0.11 390 0.02 102 0.02
All KPK,AJK 
G-B
82 0.05 79 0.08 439 0.01 498 0.01
BISE Karachi 23 0.00 5 0.00 219 0.00 140 0.01
Rest of Sindh 10 0.00 14 0.00 128 0.00 115 0.00
All BISE 739 0.08 396 0.10 1591 0.02 1122 0.02
O Levels 902 0.37 873 0.28 218 0.10 177 0.03
31 October 2012
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
89
Establishing standards for grading  
(checklists and rubrics) 
Developed by Dr Thomas Christie 
Brainstorming 
Ask Student Teachers about their ideas on criteria for grading. As they respond, 
write their thoughts on the board. This will allow you to gauge their level of 
knowledge and organize their ideas. After the Student Teachers have finished 
making suggestions, analyse their ideas in a presentation. 
Instructor presentation
Introduce standards for grading. Explain the criteria for grading and the three 
types of criteria: the nature and number of assessments, the weight given to each 
assessment, and performance standards. Provide an illustration of each. 
Q and A session
Check Student Teachers’ understanding of the material by asking the following questions:
•	 How is it possible to determine if grades provide information on the  
 achievement of course objectives?
•	 What are four factors used in establishing performance standards?  
Responses to the second question should address the following points:
•	 The grading process should be unbiased and compare each student to the  
 same criteria.
•	 Grades should be based on sufficient data to permit valid evaluations of  
 students’ achievement to be made.
•	 The component items should be related to instructional objectives.
•	 The grade names should be generally understood (e.g. pass/fail; first, second,  
 third; A, B, C).
How often to grade?
There are no hard and fast rules. However, to determine an appropriate time, it is 
often worthwhile to look at the difference in rate of learning between the highest 
achievers and lowest achievers. When the time comes to move to a new topic, 
most teachers focus on two or three pupils at the top of the bottom quartile, the 
class’s 20th percentile. Once this group shows signs of mastering the topic, the high 
achievers have likely become bored and restless, and it is time for a new topic. This 
has been formalized as mastery learning (Block and Airasian, 1971, pp. 37–38). The 
teacher introduces new material, covers it for about two weeks, and then tests the 
class. When the results are returned, each non-master is paired with a master for 
peer teaching. Those in between fend for themselves or work in groups.
After three weeks, the whole class can move on. The mastery learning approach 
usually establishes a pattern that leads to at least four classroom tests in a term. If 
each test has a reliability of 0.8, then according to the Spearman–Brown prophecy 
formula, the reliability of the aggregate score would be 0.93, which is as high as 
achievement test reliabilities get.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
90
That calculation brings us as close to a rule for the number of grades we will get. 
The rule says that while it is inevitable that a grade award may be wrong by one 
grade, it should only very rarely be wrong by two grades. To make sure we are 
within these limits, calculate the standard error of measurement, SE mean = SD √1 – 
rtt. If the correlation coefficient is r tt = 0.93, then the SE is a little over a quarter of the 
SD. The SE mean is assumed to be normally distributed, so in the highest risk case, 
where the observed score is the grade cut-off score, the next cut-off would have to be 
more than two standard errors away, or 0.6 standard deviations. Even a very good 
test will have a range of only six standard deviations. Thus, the maximum number 
of grades in these ideal conditions is 10. Half that number would be safer. That still 
leaves a further problem near the mean. If you choose five grades, more than half 
of the examinees will get the same grade, grade three on a five-point scale. If you 
choose to have six grades, you have to make difficult decisions where the greatest 
number of people will likely be affected by error (see the normal curve). It becomes 
a question of whether you are trying to build achievement for most or success for some.
Interpretation of test scores 
Developed by Samreen Jalal 
Brainstorming
Ask Student Teachers about their ideas about the methods of interpreting test scores. 
As they respond, write their thoughts on the board. This will allow you to gauge 
their level of knowledge and organize their ideas. After the Student Teachers have 
finished making suggestions, analyse their ideas in a presentation.
Instructor presentation 
Introduce, explain, and provide specific examples of methods of interpreting test 
scores. Discuss criterion-referenced methods related to the grading standards used 
by the National Curriculum 2006 revision and norm-referenced methods, especially 
marking on the curve, which deliberately distributes marks to conform to the areas 
under the normal curve.
Think, pair, share 
Divide Student Teachers in pairs. Ask them to think about potential pitfalls in 
interpreting test scores.
Instructor presentation 
Introduce and explain the issues in interpreting test scores. 
Consider using the following references in creating the presentation for this topic:
•	 Shermis, M, D., & Divesta, F, J. (2011). Classroom	assessment	in	action   
 (pp. 28–34). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. 
•	 Miller, M. D., Linn, R. L,. & Gronlund, N. (2009). Measurement	and 	
		 assessment	in	teaching  (10th ed.) (pp. 461–465, 486–489). Chicago, IL: R. R.  
  Donnelley & Sons Co.
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
91
Modes of reporting
Developed by Samreen Jalal 
Brainstorming
Ask Student Teachers about their ideas about modes of reporting. As they respond, 
write their thoughts on the board. This will allow you to gauge their level of 
knowledge and organize their ideas. After the Student Teachers have finished 
making suggestions, analyse their ideas in a presentation. 
Q and A session
Ask Student Teachers the following questions:
•	 Which method is best for clarifying a student’s progress in learning?
•	 What is used to maintain a record of progress that follows a student from  
 grade to grade? 
•	 What is used to provide a basis of discussion with parents?
Reporting assessment results and 
problems in grading and reporting 
Developed by Samreen Jalal 
Examples of student report cards are required for this session.
Brainstorming
Ask Student Teachers to share their ideas about reporting assessment results. As they 
respond, write their thoughts on the board. This will allow you to gauge their level 
of knowledge and organize their ideas. After the Student Teachers have finished 
making suggestions, analyse their ideas in a presentation. 
Q and A session
Ask Student Teachers the following questions:
•	 What is the best way to communicate to students and parents a student’s  
 performance in college and potential for further success?
•	 What are some ways to organize a lesson, unit, or semester in order to mark  
 transitions in a course, including conclusions?
Instructor presentation
Introduce issues related to reporting assessment results and provide examples 
related to each. Discuss this in relation to reporting results to students, other 
teachers, parents, and the school, and reference problems in grading and reporting. 
Consider using teaching aids, such as charts, an overhead projector, or a PowerPoint 
presentation, to supplement and illustrate your presentation.
One-minute paper
Ask Student Teachers to write a one-minute paper on the ideas and concepts covered 
in the Instructor presentation.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
92
Instructor presentation
Introduce uses and modes of reporting. For students, report card grades should 
not only enable them to interpret their progress since their last report, but they 
should also indicate in what ways progress has been made and what remediation 
is necessary to get back on track. For parents, a report card provides an accurate 
picture of their child’s strengths and weaknesses. It can inform what they need to 
do to help their child and in what areas remedial help is needed. In parent–teacher 
conferences, a well-considered report of student progress provides reasonable 
justification for an assigned grade.
Presenting data
Highlight the common features and fields on student report cards and share 
examples. Student Teachers will share the features that were present on their own 
report cards at school. 
The discussion should address what messages report cards convey about education 
in the institution in which they are used. Student Teachers should also consider 
whether report cards are appropriate, how they might be improved, and why.
Conclusion
Conclude the lesson with a summary of the session and answer any questions that 
Student Teachers may have.
The following resources may be helpful in summarizing the lesson or creating the 
actual lesson:
Department of Education and Early Childhood Development (n.d.). Sample report 
cards. Retrieved from: 
 Ø http://www .education.vic.gov .au/school/teachers/support/pages/reportcards.
aspx?Redirect=1 
Ebel, R. L., & Frisbie, D. A. (1991). Essentials	of	educational	measurement  (5th ed.) (pp. 
265–267). New Delhi: Prentice Hall of India. 
Education Review Office (2008). Assessment in primary schools: A guide for parents. 
Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .ero.govt.nz/National-Reports/
Assessment-in-Primary-Schools-A-Guide-for-Parents-December-2008
Guskey, T. R. (2010). Grading	and	reporting	student	learning  (pp. 2–8). Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage Publications. 
Marzano, R. J. (2006). Classroom	assessment	and	grading	that	work  (pp. 125–132). 
Alexandria, VA: Association of Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
Shermis, M, D., & Divesta, F. J. (2011). Classroom	assessment	in	action  (pp. 361–365). 
Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. 
Walvoord, B, E., & Anderson, V. J. (1998). Effective	grading:	A	tool	for	learning	and	
assessment (pp. 2–5, p. 125). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
 
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
93
EVALUATION
Classroom observation
Developed by Dr Bashir Hussain and Dr Shafqat Hussain 
Observation exercise
Ask the Student Teachers to work in pairs on an observation exercise. Each pair will 
leave class for five minutes and observe their surroundings. The pairs will come 
back and report two things: the focus (e.g. the whole scene, the building’s physical 
structure, people) and what specifically was observed (e.g. the building has five 
rooms with wide glass windows). 
After all the Student Teachers have reported their observations, sum up the activity 
by explaining that the observation was an assessment. This form of assessment is 
used for ongoing assessment of teaching and learning taking place in the classroom. 
Teachers observe students in class to gauge a variety of things, such as who in class 
is excited, bored, frustrated, motivated, or making progress. Successful teachers 
know how to use these observations to modify their teaching and mould student 
learning. 
Purpose and principles of classroom observation
Distribute and discuss the handout ‘Classroom observation protocol’, available from 
http://www .snct.org.uk/library/1231/Classroom%20Observation%20Protocol.pdf, 
which discusses the purpose and principles of classroom observation. 
Classroom observation to promote assessment for learning
Share the 10 principles from Gardner’s Assessment	for	learning. Ask Student Teachers 
to identify any three principles that are directly fulfilled by effective classroom 
observation.
Key words
•	 Classroom observation
•	 Observation format 
•	 Observation results 
•	 Portfolio
•	 Types of portfolios
•	 Portfolio assessment process 
•	 Oral questioning
•	 Anecdotal records and notes
•	 Student judgements and reports 
•	 Student progress and teaching-learning process 
•	 School effectiveness and improvement
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
94
Assessment for learning
•	 is a part of planning;
•	 focuses on how students learn;
•	 is essential to classroom practice;
•	 is a key professional tool;
•	 is sensitive and constructive;
•	 fosters motivation;
•	 promotes understanding of goals and criteria;
•	 helps learners know how to improve;
•	 develops the capacity for self-assessment;
•	 recognizes all educational achievement.
From Gardner, J. (2006). Assessment	and	learning:	An	introduction  (p. 3). Gateshead, 
UK: Sage Publications.
Ask each Student Teacher to share their chosen principles. Then have the class 
engage in a debate to come to a consensus on three to five common principles that 
are directly fulfilled by classroom observation. 
Planning and preparing for observations 
and the typical observation format
Developed by Dr Bashir Hussain and Dr Shafqat Hussain 
Requirements for classroom observation
Explain that when classroom observation is used as an assessment method, it 
requires careful planning by the observer. A concise list of planning requirements is 
provided in ‘Classroom observation’ (available from http://www .atl.org.uk/Images/
ADV19%20Classroom%20observation.pdf). Print this document and use it as a 
handout.
What to observe
Remind Student Teachers of the observation exercise they completed and how 
their focus determined what they observed. As they were not able to observe 
everything in their surroundings during the exercise, they will not be able to do 
so in a classroom either. It is important to determine an area of focus in teaching 
and learning. This focus informs who will be observed – the teacher, the students, 
or a few students. In addition, the focus determines which aspects of teaching and 
learning will be observed, such as teacher attention, teacher–student interaction, 
student–student interaction, and student communication. 
Divide Student Teachers into groups of six and ask each group to select three 
features to be the focus of an observation in a primary classroom. Before choosing 
the features, the group needs to decide the purpose of observation and who to 
observe in the class.
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
95
Share the following observation tools, which will provide the Student Teachers with 
some guidance:
•	 Classroom observation checklist (n.d.). Available from:
 Ø http://www .gadsdenstate.edu/faculty-and-staff/ie/documents/
ClassroomObservationChecklist.pdf
•	 Classroom observation checklist (n.d.). Available from:
 Ø http://www .unl.edu/gradstudies/current/teaching/Classroom_
Observation_Form.pdf
•	 Classroom observation checklist (n.d.). Available from: 
 Ø http://www .austincc.edu/hr/eval/procedures/ClassObservCheck.pdf
Homework
Each group will develop an observation form, and each group member will go to 
two primary school classrooms and record observations. 
How to derive results from the 
observation
Developed by Isbah Mustafa 
Compiling and deriving results from the observation
The groups will compile their observations from the primary school classrooms. For 
binary or scale observation, frequency will be used. For observation by frequency 
of occurrence, the groups will use mean and standard deviation as the basic tool for 
making meaning of their observations. 
Each group will derive results from the observation data. They should look for 
outliers while analysing the data to guard against any misinterpretation. Each group 
will present their findings to the class. Terms such as satisfactory,	unsatisfactory,  and 
proficient can be used to present the findings. 
Homework
Each group will write a report on their classroom observation. The report 
will contain the information about the focus, observation tool, the number of 
observations, and major findings. The report will be included as part of the final 
assessment. 
Oral questioning
Share data on teacher questioning behaviour based on observations of a sample of 
government middle school classrooms in Pakistan. Ask Student Teachers to interpret 
the following data from 1058 classrooms in government middle schools, and then 
discuss oral questioning practices in primary schools in Pakistan. 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
96
Questioning style of the teacher (in %)
The teacher asks more than two questions 77
The teacher asks open-ended question 44
The teacher gives adequate response time 34
The teacher gives explanatory comments 44
The teacher checks for understanding of the topic 47
The teacher takes response from a selected group of students 13
Source: Mustafa, I. (2010) EDLINKS close out report by Aga Khan University 
Examination Board
Effective questioning
Effective questioning involves the careful framing of questions, wait time, the 
involvement of the majority of the students, peer discussion by students to reach 
to an answer, open-ended and problem-solving questions, positive reinforcement, 
reflection by the teacher, and teacher feedback (Black, Harrison, Lee, Marshall, and 
Wiliam, 2003; Clarke, 2005). 
Discuss each of the elements and encourage the Student Teachers to think of the 
impact each element has on teaching and learning.
Conclusion
Student Teachers will write a paragraph on how questioning in primary classrooms 
can be made effective in Pakistan. 
Student portfolios
Developed by Zahid Majeed 
Introduction
Ask Student Teachers the following questions on student portfolios, but do not 
mention the lecture topic:
•	 How have your Instructors evaluated you progress during your university studies?
•	 Can you highlight the main elements of evaluation criteria used by your  
 university Instructors?
•	 What different tools were used to evaluate your progress? Why were these  
  tools used?
•	 What procedure did the university use to inform you about your progress in a  
 particular subject or semester? 
After the Student Teachers have responded to these questions and discussed the 
related issues, introduce the topic of this session: student portfolios.
Student portfolios
Briefly describe student portfolios and provide a definition. Make sure that Student 
Teachers understand the difference between progress and performance. 
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
97
Portfolio evaluation criteria
Give a brief lecture on measuring student progress through the use of a portfolio. 
Share some examples of evaluation criteria. 
Group work
Supply four or five student portfolios and rubrics that can be used to evaluate them. 
Portfolios can be downloaded from:
 Ø http://sbs.mnsu.edu/socialstudies/studentportfolios/evaluate.html.
Divide Student Teachers into groups of four or five and have them evaluate the 
portfolios based on the rubrics provided. The Student Teachers will share their 
assessment of student progress through portfolios. Each group will present their 
evaluations to the class.
Conclusion
Summarize the features and purpose of student portfolios and the related evaluation process. 
Homework
Ask Student Teachers to develop an outline of the contents of a student portfolio. A 
portfolio intends to measure student performance over a semester. Student Teachers 
should also try to develop criteria to evaluate the portfolio. 
References
Brennan, R. L. (2006). Educational 	measurement. Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers.
Miller, M. D., Linn, R. L,. & Gronlund, N. (2009). Measurement	and	assessment	in	teaching 
(10th ed.) (pp. 461–465, 486–489). Upper Saddle River, NJ: R. R. Donnelley & Sons Co.
Portfolio evaluation rubric (2012). Retrieved from: 
 Ø http://www .uvm.edu/~cnhs/resources/CSD_portfolio_evaluation_form.pdf
Portfolio rubric (n.d.). Retrieved from :
 Ø http://www .aug.edu/~tdevwww/faculty_info/Initial_Ceritification_Portfolio_
Rubric.pdf
Prince George’s County Public Schools (n.d.). Portfolio assessment. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .pgcps.org/~elc/portfolio.html
Anecdotal records, student judgements, 
and reports 
Developed by Zahid Majeed 
Brainstorming
Recall the discussion on student portfolios with Student Teachers, and ask the 
following questions:
•	 What tools are available to assess student achievement and learning?
•	 How are these tools used to assess the students’ academic achievements?
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
98
Introduce the session topic: different assessment tools used by primary school 
teachers to evaluate student performance and achievement.
Print ‘Student assessment’ (available from http://learndat.tech.msu.edu/teach/
student-assessment) and use it as a reading. Ask Student Teachers what they learned 
from this reading, and engage them in a whole-class discussion. 
Anecdotal report
Explain the tools used to assess student learning and achievements. Share anecdotal 
record-keeping devices. Samples are available from:
 Ø http:/ /learndat.tech.msu.edu/teach/student-assessment.
Divide Student Teachers into groups of four or five, and ask them to decide which of 
these tools can be used to assess student learning in government primary schools. 
Each group will share their points with the group sitting next to them. 
Student judgements
Ask Student Teachers to think how student judgement, in the form of self- and 
peer assessments, can be incorporated into student assessments. Responses 
should reference techniques such as peer marking of student work in summative 
examinations. 
Conclusion
Summarize the main points of the session.
Assessment
Ask Student Teachers to visit a primary school near their home and interview a 
teacher on the tools used to assess student progress and how those tools are used. 
References 
Anastasi, A., & Urbina, S. (1997). Psychological	testing (7th ed.) (chapter 17). New York: 
Macmillan. 
Copeland, C. (2013). Assessment tools to monitor students’ progress. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .ehow .com/list_7710789_assessment-tools-monitor-students-progress.html
Elrod, J. (n.d.). Assessment tools used in schools. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .ehow .com/info_7956483_assessment-tools-used-schools.html
Leo, J. (n.d.). Teachers’ assessment tools. Retrieved from: 
 Ø http://www .ehow .com/info_7903589_teachers-assessment-tools.html
Mehrens, W. A., & Lehmann, I. J. (1987). Using	standardized	tests	in	education  (4th ed.) 
(chapter 9). New York: Longman. 
Miller, M. D., Linn, R. L. & Gronlund, N. E. (2009). 	Measurement	and	assessment	in	
teaching. New Jersey: R. R. Donnelley & Sons Company.
Student assessment (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://learndat.tech.msu.edu/teach/student-assessment
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
99
Analysing and reporting student 
progress:
Developed by Zahid Majeed 
Introduction
Review the previous discussion on student portfolios. Note that summative 
examinations can be used for some of the same purposes as a portfolio. Longitudinal 
data about student performance within a cohort indicates progress made by the 
group and individuals over time. 
Use ‘Test scores: A guide to understanding and using test results’ by D. P. Flanagan 
and L. F. Caltabiano, available from http://www .nasponline.org/communications/
spawareness/testscores.pdf, to prepare a presentation on analysing and reporting 
student progress.
Prerequisites for measuring student progress
Ask Student Teachers to think about what is needed in a summative examination to 
inform a teacher of student progress. Answers should include:
•	 standards-referenced tests
•	 standardized marking
•	 uniformity in reporting student scores.
Issues in measuring student progress using raw scores
Share copies of used mark sheets from SSC and HSSC exams. In pairs, Student 
Teachers will compare marks from the two results to evaluate student progress. 
Each pair will work with another pair to compile a list of potential problems and 
limitations in using student scores to measure progress. This list will be shared with 
the class. 
Conclusion
Summarize the challenges in using scores to measure progress and, in particular, 
note the lack of standardized marking and the limited use of raw scores in reporting 
in Pakistan. 
Homework
Student Teachers will write a paragraph on measures required in government 
primary schools in Pakistan to produce student achievement data that measures 
student progress.
 
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
100
School effectiveness and classroom 
improvement
Developed by Zahid Majeed 
Introduction
Define the terms school	effectiveness  and classroom	improvement. These ideas are 
based on the assumption that schools influence student development. Specifically, 
financial and human resources, context, and process are the inputs that influence 
student development. The classroom improvement model does not compare input 
and output; rather it compares two outputs from the same institution to gauge 
improvement. The most valuable output is information about student achievement. 
Brainstorming
Working in groups, Student Teachers will brainstorm how student achievement data 
can reflect school effectiveness and classroom improvement. 
The groups will then come together to discuss their thoughts with the class. As they 
respond, write their thoughts on the board. This will allow you to gauge their level 
of knowledge and organize their ideas. After the Student Teachers have finished 
making suggestions, analyse their ideas in a presentation. 
School improvement life cycle 
To introduce the subject, use the school improvement life cycle, available from 
http://www .advanc-ed.org/school-improvement-life-cycle. The cycle involves using 
achievement data to help set goals for schools, design efforts to achieve those goals, 
and evaluate the efforts. 
A model of school improvement
To introduce the model, use the study by Mourshed, Chikioke, and Barber, ‘How 
the world’s most improved school systems keep getting better’ (available from 
https://mckinseyonsociety .com/downloads/reports/Education/How-the-Worlds-
Most-Improved-School-Systems-Keep-Getting-Better_Download-version_Final.pdf). 
Distribute a copy of page 30 to the class. This page summarizes the efforts identified 
as effective in moving a school system from poor to fair. 
After Student Teachers have read the summary, ask them to identify three efforts 
from the list that would be most effective in attempts to improve government 
primary schools in Pakistan. After each Student Teacher shares his or her 
preferences, the class will debate to reach a consensus on which three interventions 
can be most relevant and effective in the Pakistani context. 
Conclusion 
Recap the definitions of school effectiveness and classroom improvement as well as 
the use of student achievement data to gauge improvement and effectiveness.
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
101
Methods and 
strategies to use in 
planning teaching 
and learning
5
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
102
The following is a list of some of the strategies used in this course to encourage 
active learning. 
Active lecturing.  An active lecture is not too different from any good lecture, but it 
attempts to directly involve listeners. 
There is no one best way to give an active lecture, but it involves any of the following 
techniques
Give information in small chunks (about 10 minutes), and then have class members 
do something with that information for a few minutes. Here are some examples of 
activities, which you can repeat or vary:
•	 Write a one-minute reaction to what you have just heard. 
¡¡ Talk to the person next to you about what you heard and see how your 
 perspectives differ. Do you agree? Do you have questions?
•	 List as many key points as you can remember.
•	 Compare notes taken during the chunk. Help each other fill in gaps or  
  determine if crucial information is missing. (Some people do not allow note  
  taking during the lecture, but this is up to the Instructor.)
Give out cards or slips of paper in three different colours. When class members are 
listening to your comments, have them hold up a colour for ‘I understand’, ‘I don’t 
understand’, or ‘I disagree’. Then either stop and allow questions, or adjust what you 
are saying so there are more ‘understand’ colours showing. This is particularly effec -
tive with large groups of 50 or more people.
Ambassadors. This is a useful way to get groups or individuals to exchange infor -
mation. Two or more members move from one group to another to share/compare 
discussion etc. You may wish to have half of each group move to another group. This 
is especially useful if you do not have ample time for a whole-class discussion.
Brainstorming.  This is a technique for generating creative ideas on a topic. It may be 
an individual activity or organized as a group activity. Give people a limited amount 
of time (e.g. one minute) to say or write as many ideas as they can on a topic. No mat -
ter how unrelated an idea seems, write it down. (Alternatively, the Instructor might 
ask the whole class to brainstorm and write all the ideas on the board.) After the brief 
period of brainstorming, ideas may then be analysed, organized, and discussed. This 
is often used as a problem-solving technique. Ideas are then analysed in light of how 
useful they might be in solving the problem. 
Gallery walk.  This is a strategy that borrows its name from a visit to an art gallery. 
Students walk through an exhibit of posters, artefacts, or display of items they have 
completed. They can be directed to take notes. The idea is to thoughtfully look at 
what is displayed.
Graffiti wall.  A graffiti wall may be displayed in the classroom for use all term. 
Students may write their thoughts, feelings, or expressions before or following each 
session and sign their name. Anonymous comments are not suitable. Ideas generated 
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
103
in class may be posted on the ‘wall’. Use paper from a large roll of craft or newsprint 
paper or join several cardboard boxes together to make a wall that can be stored 
between sessions. Students can take turns getting and putting away the wall each 
session.
Group work: some tips for forming instructional groups. There is no one best 
way to form groups. The best way for you is the way that suits your purpose. Use a 
more complicated strategy if students need a break or need to be energized. Use a 
simple technique if time is short. Ways to form groups include the following:
•	 Ask people to count off from one to five (depending on the number of people  
  you want in a group). Groups will form based on their number (e.g. all of the  
  ones will gather together).
•	 Before class, determine how many people you want in a group or how many  
  groups you need. Give each class member a different coloured sticker, star, or  
  dot as they enter the class. Then when it is time to form groups, ask them to  
  find people with the same sticker etc. and sit together.
•	 Put different coloured bits of paper in a cup or jar on each table. Have people  
  take one and find people in the room with the same colour to form a group.
•	 Have students get together with everybody born in the same month as  
 they were. 
Make adjustments to the groups as needed.
Mini-lecture. A mini-lecture contains all the components of a good lecture. It is 
sharply focused. It begins with an introduction that provides an overview of what 
you will talk about.  
It offers examples and illustrations of each point. It concludes with a summary of the 
main point(s). 
One-minute paper. Ask class members to write for one minute on a particular topic 
(e.g. their reflections on a topic, an assigned subject). They are to focus on writing 
their ideas, without worrying about grammar and spelling. A one-minute paper 
differs from brainstorming because there is more focus. 
Pair-share.  Use this technique when you want two class members to work together 
to share ideas or accomplish a task. Simply ask them to work with a neighbour or 
have them find a partner based on some other criteria. It is very useful when you 
want people to quickly exchange ideas without disrupting the flow of the class. 
(Sharing in triads and foursomes are also small group techniques.)
Poster session. This is useful when you want students to organize their thoughts on 
a topic and present it to others in a quick but focused way. Have individuals or small 
groups work to create a poster to explain or describe something. For example, if they 
have been doing an inquiry on a particular topic, they would want to include their 
focus, methods, and outcomes, along with colourful illustrations or photographs. 
The poster can be self-explanatory or students can use it to explain their work. As an 
in-class tool, a poster session is often combined with a gallery walk so that the class 
may review a number of posters in a short time.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
104
Readers’ theatre. readers’ theatre is a group dramatic reading from a text. Readers 
take turns reading all or parts of a passage. The focus is on oral expression of the 
part being read rather than on acting and costumes. readers’ theatre is a way to bring 
a text to life. 
It is a good idea to go over passages to be read aloud with students so they are famil -
iar with any difficult words. 
Sometimes readers’ theatre is used to get student interested in a text. They hear pas -
sages read first and then read the longer text. 
KWL. This is a strategy that provides a structure for recalling what students know 
(K) about a topic, noting what students want to know (W), and finally listing what 
has already been learned and is yet to be learned (L).
The KWL strategy allows students to take inventory of what they already know and 
what they want to know. Students can categorize information about the topic that 
they expect to use as they progress through a lesson or unit.
Text-against-text. This is a way of helping students learn to analyse and compare 
written documents. The idea is to look at two documents and search for overlap, 
confirmation, or disagreement. It is a way of looking at different perspectives. Some -
times it is useful to give students readings prior to class and ask them to compare the 
readings based on a set of study questions, such as:
1) Look at each author separately. What do you think the author’s main point is? 
2) How does the author support his/her argument? 
3) Look at the authors together. In what ways do the authors agree? 
4) What are their points of disagreement?
5) What is your opinion on the issue? 
Text-against-text may be used to compare a new reading or new information with 
material that has already been covered. 
In classrooms where the whole class uses a single textbook, Instructors often find 
they are teaching against what is in the textbook. Sometimes it is hard for students to 
accept that a textbook can and should be questioned. Putting together a text against 
text activity using the textbook and outside materials (e.g. an article) can help them 
understand that there are legitimate differences of opinion on a subject. Articles 
need not contradict each other. They may be about the same topic, but offer students 
different ways of seeing a subject.
Another way to use the activity is divide the class into groups, give each a set of ma -
terials, and have them debate the texts. Some university faculty like to put together 
text sets that include both scholarly and non-scholarly works and have students to 
think about differences. For example, you might provide all students—regardless of 
their reading level or learning style—with easy-to-read materials as a way to intro -
duce themselves to a topic. Even competent adult learners seek out ‘easy’ books or 
materials to learn about a new or complex topic. Providing a picture, newspaper article, 
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
105
or even a children’s book in a text set might give everyone the means of connecting to 
or understanding some aspect of the larger subject. 
Roundtable technique. For this technique, divide the class into small groups (i.e. four 
to six people), with one person appointed as the recorder. A question that has many 
possible answers is posed, and class members are given time to think about the an -
swers. After the thinking period, members of the team share their responses with one 
another. The recorder writes the group’s answers. The person next to the recorder 
starts and each person in the group (in order) gives an answer until time is called. 
Quizzes. Prepare and give a short quiz (15 minutes) over the different aspects of test 
development and evaluation covered in the unit. As students take the quiz, ask them 
to circle items they are unsure of. They can review and discuss their work in the 
following ways:
•	 Triads. Have students meet in groups of three to review the quizzes so that  
  they can help each other with their weak areas. (10 minutes)
•	 Review. Go over the quiz with students, and have them look at their own work  
  and make corrections. (30 minutes)
¡¡ Notice points class members had difficulty remembering and take time to  
  review them. You may ask students to assist with this and discuss how they  
  were able to remember.
¡¡ Use this time to correct any misconceptions.
¡¡ Have students save their quiz for future study.
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
106
Resources
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
107
Accountability
Hout, M., & Elliott, S. W. (2011). Test as performance measure. In Incentive	and	test-
based	accountability	in	education  (pp. 37–52). Washington, DC: The National  
Academies Press. Available from:
 Ø http:/ /www.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=12521&page=37
Adams, S. J., Heywood, J.S., & Rothstein, R. (2009). Teachers,	performance	pay,	and	 	
accountability:	What	education	should	learn	from	other	sectors . Washington, DC:  
Economic Policy Institute. Retrieved from: 
 Ø http:/ /www.epi.org/page/-/pdf/teachers_performance_pay_and_accountability-
full_text.pdf
Alpha and Beta testing by study mode
jmgallegos78 (2011). Alpha and Beta testing. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www.studymode.com/essays/Alpha-And-Beta-Testing-669067.html
The Alpha and Beta tests of World War I (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø http:/ /www.nald.ca/library/research/adlitus/page19.htm
Assessment
Educational assessment (n.d.). Retrieved 27 June 2013 from:
 Ø http:/ /en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Educational_assessment
What can I learn about assessment from this website? (n.d.) Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www.cmu.edu/teaching/assessment/
Authenticity, objectivity, adequacy, and differentiability
Lewkowicz, J. A. (2000). Authenticity in language testing. Language	Testing, 17, 43–64. 
Retrieved from: 
 Ø http:/ /englishvls.hunnu.edu.cn/Downloads/LangTst/tst_003.pdf
Qichun, Z. (2005). The analysis of authenticity in language test. CELEA	Journal,	28, 
122–125. Retrieved from: 
 Ø http://www.celea.org.cn/teic/59/59-122.pdf
Central tendency
Central tendency (n.d.) Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .quickmba.com/stats/centralten/
Classical theory
Lin, C. J. (2008). Comparisons between classical test theory and item response theory 
in automated assembly of parallel test forms. The	Journal	of	Technology,	Learning,	and	
Assessment,	6. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://ejournals.bc.edu/ojs/index.php/jtla/article/view/1638/1473
Steyer, R. (n.d.). Classical (psychometric) test theory. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .metheval.uni-jena.de/materialien/publikationen/ctt.pdf
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
108
Classroom observation
The value of observation (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www2.education.ualberta.ca/staff/olenka.Bilash/best%20of%20bilash/ 
 observation.html
Classroom observation in teaching practice. In Practice	teaching:	A	reflective	approach  
(pp. 90–105). Retrieved from: 
 Ø http://www .professorjackrichards.com/wp-content/uploads/Practice-Teaching-A-
Reflective-Approach-Chap-7-Classroom-Observation-in-Teaching-Practice.pdf
Classroom observation checklist
Classroom observation checklist (n.d.). Retrieved from: 
 Ø http://www .gadsdenstate.edu/faculty-and-staff/ie/documents/ 
 ClassroomObservationChecklist.pdf
Classroom observation instruments (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www1.umn.edu/ohr/teachlearn/resources/peer/instruments/
Comparability
Interpreting claims of test comparability: Important considerations, concerns, and 
caveats (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://stepeiken.org/comparability
Dispersion
Dispersion – Deviation and variance (n.d.). Retrieved from :
 Ø http://www .wyzant.com/help/math/statistics_and_probability/averages/
dispersion_deviation_and_variance
Statistical dispersion (n.d.) Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .princeton.edu/~achaney/tmve/wiki100k/docs/Statistical_
dispersion.html
Effective testing and test utility fairness
Writing effective tests: A guide for teachers (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .glencoe.com/sec/teachingtoday/educationupclose.phtml/40
Fairness and bias. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .siop.org/_Principles/pages31to34.pdf
Error
Error in measurement (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .regentsprep.org/Regents/math/ALGEBRA/AM3/LError.htm
Evaluation
Prakash, J. (n.d.) Valuable notes on the evaluation process in education.  
Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .preservearticles.com/201105216973/evaluation-process-in-education.html
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
109
Feedback, reporting, and results interpretation
Education and Staff Development, Queen Mary University of London (n.d.). Good 
practice guide on assessment and feedback to students. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .learninginstitute.qmul.ac.uk/ideas/wp-content/uploads/Assessment-
and-Feedback-Good-Practice-Guide.pdf
Guides to test reports (2012–13 edition) (2012). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .celdt.org/resources/im/
Nicol, D. (2007). Principles of good assessment and feedback: Theory and practice. 
Keynote paper delivered at the Assessment Design for Learner Responsibility confer -
ence, 29–31 May 2007. Retrieved from: 
 Ø http://www .york.ac.uk/media/staffhome/learningandteaching/documents/
keyfactors/Principles_of_good_assessment_and_feedback.pdf
Spiller, D. (2009). Assessment: Feedback to promote student learning. Hamilton, 
New Zealand: the University of Waikato. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .waikato.ac.nz/tdu/pdf/booklets/6_AssessmentFeedback.pdf
Formative and summative assessment
Bennett, R. E. (2011). Formative assessment: A critical review. 	Assessment	in	Educa -
tion:	Principles,	Policy	&	Practice,	18 , 5–25. Available from:
 Ø http://www .skolverket.se/polopoly_fs/1.126607!Menu/article/attachment/
formative_assassement.pdf
Formative vs summative assessment (n.d.) Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .cmu.edu/teaching/assessment/howto/basics/formative-summative.
html
Garrison, C., & Ehringhaus, M. (2007). Formative and summative assessments in the 
classroom. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .amle.org/Publications/WebExclusive/Assessment/tabid/1120/
Default.aspx
What is the difference between formative and summative assessment? (n.d.).  
Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .cmu.edu/teaching/assessment/basics/formative-summative.html
Frequencies
Frequency (n.d.). Retrieved 27 June 2013 from:
 Ø http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frequency
Hall, S. (n.d.) How to calculate frequency statistics. Retrieved from :
 Ø http://www .ehow .com/how_7247964_calculate-frequency-statistics.html
Generalizability theory
Webb, N. M., & Shavelson, R. J. (2005). Generalizability theory: Overview. In B. 
S. Everitt & D.C. Howell, Encyclopedia	of	statistics	in	behvioral	science  (pp. 717–719). 
Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .stanford.edu/dept/SUSE/SEAL/Reports_Papers/GTheoryEncyclo.pdf
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
110
Histogram
Histograms: Construction, analysis and understanding (2002). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://quarknet.fnal.gov/toolkits/new/histograms.html
Data collection methods for program evaluation: Interviews (2009). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .cdc.gov/healthyyouth/evaluation/pdf/brief17.pdf
Interview
Sewell, M. (n.d.). The use of qualitative interviews in evaluation. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://ag.arizona.edu/sfcs/cyfernet/cyfar/Intervu5.htm
Qualitative methods (2011). Retrieved from: 
 Ø http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/EXTPOVERTY/
EXTISPMA/0,,contentMDK:20190070~menuPK:412148~pagePK:148956~ 
piPK:216618~theSitePK:384329,00.html
Data collection methods for program evaluation: Interviews (2009). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/evaluation/pdf/brief17.pdf
Item response theory (IRT) 
Item response theory (n.d.). Retrieved from :
 Ø http://luna.cas.usf.edu/~mbrannic/files/pmet/irt.htm
Item analyses, difficulty, and discrimination
Item analysis (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .washington.edu/oea/pdfs/resources/item_analysis.pdf
Item analysis (2003). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .scrolla.hw .ac.uk/focus/ia.html
Item analysis of classroom tests: Aims and simplified procedures. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .udel.edu/educ/gottfredson/451/unit9-guidance.htm 
Item-centred and examinee-centred performance  
standards
Albano, T. D. (2008). The Angloff and Ebel standard setting methods.  
Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .edmeasurement.net/5221/Angoff%20and%20Ebel%20SS%20%20-%20
TDA.pdf
Eckes, T. (2012). Examinee-centred standard setting for large-scale assessments: The 
prototype group method. 	Psychological	Test	and	Assessment	Modeling,  54, 257–283. 
Retrieved from:
 Ø https://www .testdaf.de/institution/pdf/publikationen/Eckes_PTAM_2012-3.pdf
Hazlett, C. B. (n.d.) Standard setting: Determining the appropriate Pass-Fail Score. 
Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .oes.cuhk.edu.hk/Archives/Old%20Presentations/Standard.pdf
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
111
Näsström, G., & Nyström, P. (2008). A comparison of two different methods for 
setting performance standards for a test with constructed-response items. Practical	
Assessment	Research	&	Evaluation,	13. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://pareonline.net/pdf/v13n9.pdf
Item classification
Cognitive complexity classification of FCAT test items (2008). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://fcat.fldoe.org/pdf/cog_complexity-fv31.pdf
Judgement
Brooks, V. (2012). Marking as judgment. Research	Papers	in	Education,	27, 63–80.  
Retrieved from:
 Ø http://wrap.warwick.ac.uk/2812/
Mark schemes, rubrics, and double marking
Grading and Performance Rubrics (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .cmu.edu/teaching/designteach/teach/rubrics.html
Swansea University (n.d.). Double Marking Policy. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .swan.ac.uk/registry/academicguide/assessmentandprogress/
doublemarkingpolicy/
University of Cambridge International Examinations (2008). Mark Scheme for the 
May/June 2008 Question Paper. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://papers.xtremepapers.com/CIE/Cambridge%20International%20O%20
Level/Bengali%20(3204)/3204_s08_ms_1.pdf
Moderation
New Zealand Ministry of Education (n.d.). Moderation. Retrieved from:
 Ø  http://assessment.tki.org.nz/Moderation
National Professional Standards for T eachers
Policy and Planning Wing, Ministry of Education, Government of Pakistan (2009). 
National Professional Standards for Teachers in Pakistan. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://unesco.org.pk/education/teachereducation/files/National%20
Professional%20Standards%20for%20Teachers.pdf
Normalization
Normalization (n.d.). Retrieved 27 June 2013 from:
 Ø http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Normalization_(statistics)
Oral questioning
Improving your oral questioning techniques (2012). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .protocol.co.uk/downloads/Improving_your_Oral_Questioning_
Techniques.pdf  
Peer assessment and self-assessment
Peer assessment (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .heacademy .ac.uk/hlst/resources/a-zdirectory/peer_assessment
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
112
Peer-assessment (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .cte.cornell.edu/teaching-ideas/assessing-student-learning/peer-
assessment.html
Self-assessment (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .cte.cornell.edu/teaching-ideas/assessing-student-learning/self-
assessment.html
Juwah, C. (2003) Using peer assessment to develop skills and capabilities. USDLA	
Journal,	17. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .usdla.org/html/journal/JAN03_Issue/article04.html
Percentiles, stanines, percentile band scores,  
and grade equivalents
Percentiles (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .regentsprep.org/Regents/math/ALGEBRA/AD6/quartiles.htm
Robertson, I. (2004). Calculating percentiles. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .stanford.edu/class/archive/anthsci/anthsci192/anthsci192.1064/
handouts/calculating%20percentiles.pdf
Understanding stanines (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .nzcersupport.org.nz/marking/?p=75
Rogosa, D. (1999). Accuracy	of	individual	scores	expressed	in	percentile	ranks:	Classical	test	
theory	calculations . Retrieved from:
 Ø http://cse.ucla.edu/products/reports/TECH509.pdf
Grade point equivalents (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø https://courses.cit.cornell.edu/thetr364/grading.html
Understanding grade equivalents and other standardized test scores (n.d.). 
Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .cobbk12.org/Lindley6/Uploads/Parents/
UnderstandingGradeEquivalents.pdf
Placement tests
Placement test (n.d.). Retrieved 27 June 2013 from: 
 Ø http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Placement_testing
What are college placement tests? (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø https://bigfuture.collegeboard.org/find-colleges/academic-life/
what-are-college-placement-tests
Performance standards
Anderson, J. (n.d.). Accountability	in	education . Paris: The International Institute for 
Educational Planning; Brussels: The International Academy of Education.  
Retrieved from:
http://www .iaoed.org/files/Edpol1.pdf
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
113
Projects and portfolios
Almanza, D., Cackley, P., Goins, K,. LeCloux, C., Lucas, K., Marston, T., … Vocelle, 
L. (1997). Project	based	learning	and	assessment:	A	resource	manual	for	teachers.  Arlington, 
VA: Arlington Education and Employment Program. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .cal.org/caela/esl_resources/reepproj.pdf
Assessing project-based learning (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://serc.carleton.edu/introgeo/assessment/project.html
Portfolios for student growth (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .gallaudet.edu/clerc_center/information_and_resources/info_to_go/
transition_to_adulthood/portfolios_for_student_growth.html
Prince George’s County Public Schools (n.d.). Portfolio assessment. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .pgcps.org/~elc/portfolio.html
Question setting
Assessment: Final assessment (n.d.). Retrieved from: 
 Ø http://www .cdtl.nus.edu.sg/handbook/assess/objective.htm
Question writing (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://examdesign.com/WriteQuestions.aspx
Rank order
Rank order scale (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://changingminds.org/explanations/research/measurement/rank_ordering.htm
Raw scores
Texas Education Agency (n.d.). Raw conversion tables. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .tea.state.tx.us/index3.aspx?id=3270&menu_id=793
Reliability
Jacobs, L. (1991). Test reliability. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .indiana.edu/~best/bweb3/test-reliability/
Phelan, C., & Wren, J. (2005–06). Exploring reliability in academic assessment. 
Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .uni.edu/chfasoa/reliabilityandvalidity .htm
Wells, C. S., & Wollack, J. A. (2003). An instructor’s guide to understanding test reli -
ability. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://testing.wisc.edu/Reliability .pdf
Repeated observations (Spearman–Brown prophecy)
Brown, J. D. (2001). Can we use the Spearman-Brown prophecy formula to defend 
low reliability? Shiken:	JALT	Testing	&	Evaluation	SIG	Newsletter,	4, 7–11. 
Retrieved from:
 Ø http://jalt.org/test/bro_9.htm
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
114
School improvement
Creemers, B. P. M., Stoll, L., Reezgit, G., & the ESI Team (n.d.). Effective school 
improvement – Ingredients for success: The results of an international comparative 
study of best practice case studies. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .rug.nl/staff/b.p.m.creemers/effective_school_improvement_
ingredients_for_success.pdf
Education Improvement Commission (2000). 	School	improvement	planning:	A	hand -
book	for	principals,	teachers,	and	school	councils . Retrieved from: 
 Ø http://www .edu.gov .on.ca/eng/document/reports/sihande.pdf
School improvement life cycle (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .advanc-ed.org/school-improvement-life-cycle
Standard scores
Standard score (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø https://statistics.laerd.com/statistical-guides/standard-score.php
Understanding standard scores (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .faculty .virginia.edu/PullenLab/WJIIIDRBModule/
WJIIIDRBModule7.html
Standardization, standardized tests, norm referencing, 
and criterion referencing
Glutting’s guide for norm-reference test score interpretation, using a sample psycho -
logical report (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .udel.edu/educ/gottfredson/451/Glutting-guide.htm
Zucker, S. (2003). Fundamentals of standardized testing. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .pearsonassessments.com/NR/rdonlyres/20DB5E75-059E-4EB7-BFB1-
F9C171ABE0C3/0/Fundamentals_of_Standardized_Testing_Final.pdf
Student progress
Safer, N., & Fleischman, S. (2005). Research matters/how student progress monitor -
ing improves instruction. Educational	Leadership,	62, 81–83. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .ascd.org/publications/educational-leadership/feb05/vol62/num05/
How-Student-Progress-Monitoring-Improves-Instruction.aspx
T axonomy of objectives, Bloom’s T axonomy,  
and SOLO T axonomy
Bloom’s Taxonomy of educational objectives with verbs: Cognitive domain (n.d.). 
Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .madonna.edu/pdf/admissions/bloomcog.pdf
Bloom’s Taxonomy of learning domains (1999). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .nwlink.com/~donclark/hrd/bloom.html
Taxonomy of educational objectives (1956). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://centeach.uiowa.edu/materials/Taxonomy%20of%20Education%20
Objectives.pdf
COURSE GUIDE:  Test Development and Evaluation
115
T est construction
Devine, M., & Yaghlian, N. (n.d.) Test	construction	manual:	Construction	of	objective	
tests. Retrieved from: 
 Ø http://www .cte.cornell.edu/documents/Test%20Construction%20Manual.pdf
Test construction (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://citl.indiana.edu/resources/teaching-resources1/teaching-handbook-items/
test-construction.php
Wegener, D. P. (n.d.). Test construction. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .delweg.com/dpwessay/tests.htm 
T est specification
There are various resources on this website to explore:
 Ø http://www .rewardinglearning.org.uk/qualifications/results.
aspx?g=0&t=0&s=113&v=0&q=152&d=d
T opic coverage
Gomes, H. (2009). How much test coverage is enough? Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .summa-tech.com/blog/2009/03/24/
how-much-test-coverage-is-enough/
Validation
Test validation (n.d.). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .waldentesting.com/services/validation.htm
Validity
How do you determine if a test has validity, reliability, fairness, and legal defensibili -
ty? (2006). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .proftesting.com/test_topics/pdfs/test_quality .pdf
Value added and school accountability
Braun, H. I. (2005). Using	student	progress	to	evaluate	teachers:	A	primer	on	value-added	
models. Princeton, NJ: Education Testing Service. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .ets.org/Media/Research/pdf/PICV AM.pdf
Loeb, S., & Figlio, D. (2011). School accountability. In E.A. Hanushek, S. Machin, & 
L. Woessmann (eds.), Handbook	of	the	economics	of	education,	volume	3  (pp. 383–423). 
San Diego: North Holland. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://cepa.stanford.edu/content/school-accountability 
Murphy, D. (2012). Where is the value in value-added modeling? Retrieved from:
 Ø http://educatoreffectiveness.pearsonassessments.com/downloads/ViVa_v1.pdf
B.ED. (HONS) ELEMENTARY
116
Wei, H., Hembry, T., Murphy, D. L., & McBride, Y. (2012). Value-added models in the 
evaluation of teacher effectiveness: A comparison of models and outcomes. Retrieved 
from:
 Ø http://www .pearsonassessments.com/hai/images/tmrs/ComparisonofValue-
AddedModelsandOutcomes.pdf
The Florida Department of Education (USA) website provides examples of school 
accountability reports: 
 Ø http://schoolgrades.fldoe.org/
Variance and correlation
Bunzel, H. (2006). Variance, covariance and correlation. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www2.econ.iastate.edu/classes/econ500/bunzel/documents/mpdslides3.
pdf
Relationship between correlation and sample variance (2012). Retrieved from:
 Ø http://stats.stackexchange.com/questions/22890/
relationship-between-correlation-and-sample-variance
z-score and T -score
Siegle, D. (n.d.). Standardized scores. Retrieved from:
 Ø http://www .gifted.uconn.edu/siegle/research/normal/interpret%20raw%20
scores.html

